[[PAGE 1]]
biblio.ugent.be

The UGent Institutional Repository is the electronic archiving and dissemination platform for all
UGent research publications. Ghent University has implemented a mandate stipulating that all
academic publications of UGent researchers should be deposited and archived in this repository.
Except for items where current copyright restrictions apply, these papers are available in Open
Access.

This item is the archived peer-reviewed author-version of:

Validation of a coupled heat, vapour and liquid moisture transport model for porous
materials implemented in CFD

Marnix Van Belleghem, Marijke Steeman, Hans Janssen, Arnold Janssens and Michel De
Paepe

In: Building and Environment, 81, pp. 340-353, 2014.

To refer to or to cite this work, please use the citation to the published version:

Van Belleghem M., Steeman M., Janssen H., Janssens A., De Paepe M. (2014) Validation of a
coupled heat, vapour and liquid moisture transport model for porous materials
implemented in CFD. Building and Environment 81, 340-353. doi:
10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.06.024

[[PAGE 2]]
Validation of a coupled heat, vapour and liquid moisture transport model for porous materials
implemented in CFD
                      1                2              3                 4                     1
M. Van Belleghem , M. Steeman , H. Janssen , A. Janssens and M. De Paepe
1
  Ghent University, Department of Flow, Heat and Combustion Mechanics, Sint-Pietersnieuwstraat 40, B-9000 Gent, Belgium
2
  Ghent University, Department of Industrial Technology and Construction, Valentin Vaerwijckweg 1, B-9000 Gent, Belgium
3
  Building Physics Section, Department of Civil Engineering, KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 40, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
4
  Ghent University, Department of Architecture and Urban Planning, Jozef Plateaustraat 22, B-9000 Gent, Belgium

Corresponding author: Marnix Van Belleghem
Tel +3292643289 / Fax +3292643575
Email: marnix.vanbelleghem@UGent.be

Keywords

Heat and moisture transfer, HAM, CFD, Porous material, Drying

Abstract

Moisture-related damage is an important issue when looking at the performance of building envelopes.
In order to accurately predict the moisture behaviour of building components, building designers can
resort to Heat, Air and Moisture (HAM) models. In this paper a newly developed heat and mass
transfer model that is implemented in a 3D finite volume solver, Fluent®, is presented. This allows a
simultaneous modelling approach of both the convective conditions surrounding a porous material and
the heat and moisture transport in the porous material governed by diffusion. Unlike most HAM models
that often confine to constant convective transport coefficients it is now possible to better predict these
convective boundary conditions. An important application of the model is the convective drying of
porous building materials. Especially during the first drying stage, the drying rate is determined by the
convective boundary conditions. The model was validated against a convective drying experiment
from literature, in which a saturated ceramic brick sample is dried by flowing dry air over one side of
the sample surface. Temperature and relative humidity measurements at different depths in the
sample, moisture distribution profiles and mass loss measurements were compared with simulation
results. An overall good agreement between the coupled model and the experiments was found,
however, the model predicted the constant drying rate period better than the falling rate period. This
was improved by adjusting the material properties. The adjustment of the material properties was
supported by neutron radiography measurements.

Nomenclature

Symbol                Description                                                              Unit

cp                    Specific heat                                                            J/kgK

C                     Specific heat capacity                                                   J/kgK
                                                                   -8        4
Cb                    Stefan Boltzmann constant (5.67 x 10 W/m²K )                             -

Dva                   Diffusivity of water vapour in air                                       m²/s

E                     Total energy                                                             J

g                     Moisture flux                                                            kg/m²s

[[PAGE 3]]
h               Specific enthalpy                                      J/kg

h               Heat transfer coefficient (convection and radiation)   W/m²K
    T
h               Convective heat transfer coefficient                   W/m²K
    Y
h m             Convective mass transfer coefficient                   s/m

Kl              Liquid permeability                                    s

L               Latent heat                                            J/kg

P               Pressure                                               Pa

pv              Partial vapour pressure                                Pa

pc              Capillary pressure                                     Pa

q               Heat Flux                                              W/m²

RH              Relative humidity                                      -

Rv              Specific gas constant of water vapour                  J/kgK

T               Temperature                                            K

v               Velocity                                               m/s

w               Moisture content                                       kg/m³

Y               Mass fraction                                          kg/kg

Greek symbols

δ               Diffusion coefficient                                  s

ε               Emissivity                                             -

λ               Heat conductivity                                      W/mK

µ               Water vapour diffusion resistance factor               -

ρ               Density                                                kg/m³

ψ0              Open porosity                                          -

Subscripts

cap             Capillary

s               Surface

l               Liquid

mat             Material

op              Operating

[[PAGE 4]]
rad               Radiation

ref               Reference

sat               Saturation

v                 Vapour

Acronyms

BES               Building Energy Simulations

CFD               Computational Fluid Dynamics

HAM               Heat, Air and Moisture

      1. Introduction

During the last decades the requirements for quality of buildings and its envelopes have drastically
increased. Where before the main function of a building was to protect people from outside weather
conditions, nowadays building users demand high-performance buildings with comfortable
temperature and humidity levels without excessive energy use. However, damage to the building
envelope can reduce the building performance to a great extent. This damage is often moisture-
related and may affect the indoor comfort and indoor air quality [1,2], energy efficiency [3,4], human
health and durability [5]. In order to prevent moisture-related damage, building designers need reliable
predictive tools which can help them to design high performance building envelopes.
Modelling tools describing the moisture behaviour of buildings and its envelopes are very useful to
predict and evaluate moisture related problems. HAM (Heat, Air and Moisture) models are frequently
being used to solve the combined transport of heat and moisture in building components. Nowadays,
a wide variety of modelling tools are available [6].
These HAM models can be combined with other models to improve their performance. Examples are
combined BES-HAM models [7,8] and CFD-HAM models [9e11]. In BES-HAM models, HAM is
combined with building energy simulations to improve the prediction of building energy performance by
including the hygroscopic behaviour of building materials. In combined CFD-HAM models, HAM is
coupled with computational fluid dynamics to better incorporate the coupled effect of convective
transport of heat and moisture in the air and in the porous material. Steeman et al. [9] developed a
coupled CFD-HAM model for the assessment of moisture-related damage in hygroscopic materials. By
implementing a detailed HAM model into an existing CFD solver (Fluent®) he was able to model the
heat and moisture transport in the air and porous material simultaneously. The coupled model was
validated using climate chamber experiments [12]. However, Steeman only modelled vapour diffusion
as a transport mechanism in the porous material. With the model, it was possible to predict the
microclimate around valuable objects such as paintings. Other attempts of combining CFD and HAM
can be found in Mortensen et al. [13] and Defraeye et al. [14]. Defraeye applied an external coupling
procedure and used a separate CFD and HAM model which were then combined by transferring and
setting the boundary conditions from one model to the other.
These recent attempts to combine existing HAM models with CFD showed to be promising. They allow
a more detailed and accurate modelling of the influence of convection on the heat and moisture
transport in porous materials. However the development of these hygrothermal models is still on-
going.

[[PAGE 5]]
In this paper, a newly developed CFD-HAM model is described in which the heat and moisture
transport equations for porous materials are implemented into a commercial available CFD solver,
Fluent®. The model includes vapour as well as liquid water transport. Since it is implemented into an
existing CFD solver it is easier to combine it with convective transport in the air surrounding the porous
material. The model is therefore specifically suited to study cases where convective boundary
conditions are dominant or where the interaction of transport in the air and transport in the porous
material is important. A few examples of such cases are the effect of microclimates on historical
artefacts [9], drying of building materials during production [15], drying of building envelopes after rain,
evaporative cooling of buildings and street canyons [16], etc.

Before this model can be applied to actual case studies, it is first extensively validated. This paper will
focus on this model validation. It will highlight some important aspects when modelling combined heat
and moisture transport in porous materials, such as numerical implementation of boundary conditions,
the importance of correct material properties and the choice of the driving potentials to be used. In a
follow-up paper a case study will be elaborated [17].

     2. State of the art in convective drying modelling
In buildings, drying almost always occurs by convection. If the partial vapour pressure of the air is
lower than the vapour pressure at the surface of a porous material, moisture will be transferred to the
air and is transported away from the surface by the moving air.

Fig. 1 qualitatively depicts a typical drying rate curve of a capillary active hygroscopic material. At first,
free moisture at the material surface evaporates from the surface and the drying rate is determined by
the diffusion rate of water vapour into the surrounding air. During this constant drying rate period
(CRP), moisture is transported from the inside of the porous material to the surface by capillary forces.
As long as this transport can sustain the evaporation rate from the surface, the drying rate will remain
constant.
If the moisture content reaches a critical level at which the moisture can no longer reach the surface at
a sufficient rate, further drying will cause the surface relative humidity to drop below 100%. This is the
start of the second drying stage or the falling rate period (FRP). The drying rate is determined by the
internal moisture diffusion transport as a result of moisture concentration gradients in the material. As
the material dries out, moisture movement decreases further and consequently the drying rate drops.
The drying rate continues to fall until the moisture content inside the material is in equilibrium with the
surrounding air. At that point the drying rate becomes zero and drying stops.
During the CRP the temperature at the surface drops close to the wet bulb temperature. If the starting
temperature in the material is higher than the wet bulb temperature, the temperature will start to drop
and accordingly the drying rate will also drop. On the other hand, when initially the temperature is
lower than the wet bulb temperature, the material temperature starts to rise and so will the drying rate
(dashed lines in Fig. 1).

In literature, a wide range of drying models is available. A distinction can be made between analytical
and numerical models. In the following sections, a short overview is given of the state-of-the-art
modelling approaches for combined heat and mass transport during convective drying in air.

         2.1. Analytical modelling
Analytical models such as 1D models assuming constant diffusivity, only apply to simplified drying
cases. The applied boundary conditions are fixed temperature and humidity (Dirichlet boundary
conditions), fixed fluxes (Neumann boundary conditions) or fixed transfer coefficients (Robin boundary
conditions).
Milly [18] and more recently Abahri et.al. [19] developed an analytical solution for a coupled 1D heat
and moisture transfer problem. Their models are however limited to Dirichlet and Neumann boundary
conditions and are not sufficient when convective drying is studied. To model convective drying, at

[[PAGE 6]]
least a Robin boundary condition is needed. If more complex boundary conditions are present such as
spatially are even temporally varying boundary conditions, 1D analytical models are no longer
sufficient.
Moreover, most convective drying processes do not allow simplifications like constant diffusivity. For
most materials and in particular building materials, the diffusivity shows a strong non-linear behaviour
as function of moisture content. In literature, some solutions to non-linear diffusivity can be found, e.g.
Landman et.al. [20] looked at the drying process of a brick.
Analytical solutions can thus only be used when simple geometrical configurations, material properties
and boundary conditions apply. As soon as more complex and realistic boundary conditions are to be
solved, as is often the case in the building context, analytical models no longer work. Building
components are generally composed of multiple layers, inserting strong heterogeneity into the pro-
blem. At the same time the boundary conditions are not fixed in time and space, resulting in temporal
and spatial distributions of temperature and moisture. Consequently, it is not feasible to solve all
coupled heat and mass transport problems, especially drying problems, by simple 1D analytical
approaches.

         2.2. Numerical modelling: predetermined transfer coefficients
Numerical models can be used to solve complex 2D or 3D configurations and to overcome some of
the issues related to analytical models. To incorporate the influence of airflow properties on convective
drying without modelling the convection in the air simultaneously with the transport in the porous
material, researchers often resort to transfer coefficients.
The simplest approach is using constant (averaged) transfer coefficients. Most HAM models use this
method [7,21,22]. Berger et al. [23] were able to study drying phenomena using a 1D finite difference
model with constant heat and mass transfer coefficients as boundary conditions. Furthermore, their
study showed that the convective transfer coefficient determined the drying rate during the CRP.
During the FRP the drying rate is mostly determined by the internal transport properties and the impact
of the convective transfer coefficients is negligible. Although these conclusions were derived with a
simplified 1D model, they can be generally applied.

The use of constant transfer coefficients is however only valid if the flow is fully developed which is
often not the case even for simple geometrical conditions. The presence of developing boundary
layers or complex geometries with leading edge effects, vortex shedding, reattachment and stagnation
zones may lead to large distributions of transfer coefficient values along the surface. Furthermore,
several researchers found that the leading edge effect has a significant impact especially during the
CRP [24 - 26]. E.g. Masmoudi et al. [24] found that simplifying drying problems to 1D problems is not
generally applicable because the leading edge effect will be significant if the sample size is not clearly
larger than the mass or temperature boundary leading edge zones. Also Shokouhmand et al. [26]
found that the leading edge effect was crucial in the determination of the drying time.

A more accurate and detailed study of the convective drying process is possible when spatially varying
transfer coefficients are used. These coefficients can be derived from analytical solutions for simple
cases or from CFD solutions when more complex geometries and flow conditions are present.
The most common approach to determine the transfer coefficients from CFD is by solving the flow with
the assumption of constant boundary temperature and mass fraction [25, 27]. For convective drying
this approach is only strictly applicable during the CRP when the surface temperature is almost
constant and near to the wet bulb temperature and the surface mass fraction corresponds with the
saturation mass fraction for that temperature. Nevertheless this approach is often used with
reasonably good results.

         2.3. Numerical modelling: coupling HAM with CFD
In the drying models discussed up till now the flow field is assumed to be steady and solved separately
from the material model [28]. This can be justified if the heat and mass transfers are moderate and if
the fluxes through the solid-fluid interface do not disturb the velocity field. The variations in air density

[[PAGE 7]]
are ignored and air is considered incompressible. The heat and mass transfer coefficients are then
determined by solving transport in the air only once and assuming constant boundary conditions at the
material surface (temperature and moisture concentration).
When the surface of a porous material starts to dry out, large temperature and moisture distributions
along the surface can occur. Strictly speaking, the assumption of constant boundary conditions is then
no longer valid. For instance Masmoudi et al. [24] showed the effect of heterogeneities in the moisture
content distribution at the surface (such as dry zones) on the transfer at the interface. The transfer
coefficients clearly showed dependency on the surface moisture distribution. Similar results were
found by Defraeye et al. [14].
To implement these effects of varying transfer coefficients, it is possible to use CFD as a tool to predict
the transfer coefficients. When CFD and HAM are combined, the heat and mass transfer in the air and
the porous material can be solved simultaneously, without the need of estimated transfer coefficients.
Such models are referred to in literature as conjugate models. Defraeye et al. [29] gives a good
overview of recent developments in this field of modelling.
An early attempt to develop a coupled model was done by Amir et al. [30]. Amir et al. developed an
implicit finite difference model that simultaneously solved the set of equations for a laminar boundary
layer and a porous thick slab immersed in the boundary layer. The laminar velocity boundary layer
was considered to be steady and independent of heat and moisture. This allowed them to solve the
velocity boundary layer separately from the heat and moisture transport equation. The heat and
moisture transport equation in the boundary layer and in the porous material were then solved
simultaneously and coupled.
Zeghmati et al. [31] continued the work of Amir et al. by extending the model to include transient
laminar natural convection. The Boussinesq approximation was assumed for the boundary layer
momentum equation. Dolinskiy et al. [32] employed a similar model to simulate the drying of a thick
slab for the initial period of drying (moisture content exceeded the maximum sorption moisture
content). The authors found that the analogy between heat and mass transfer, often employed to
predict transfer coefficients, was not applicable. This was due to the fact that, for maintaining the
analogy, not only the differential equations describing the heat and mass transfer have to be
analogous, but also the boundary conditions. They found that these boundary conditions could
substantially differ in time and space.
Because moisture transport in the air and in the material is described by different potentials, conjugate
drying models often use two solvers: one to solve the transport equations in the air and one to solve
the transport in the porous material. When two solvers are used, a specific solution methodology is
needed. Oliveira et al. [28] described such a solution procedure for laminar flow to study convective
drying of a wood board and repeated the same procedure later to study soybean drying [33]. A finite
element code was developed. In the first step the continuity and momentum equations in the air were
solved separately. This is allowed if the flow is assumed steady and if the impact of density on the flow
is neglected. The velocity field obtained from this calculation was assumed invariable during the rest of
the simulation. Next the boundary layer was solved using boundary conditions of the first kind
(constant temperature and concentration). The results of this numerical analysis were used to
determine the heat and moisture fluxes at the surface. These fluxes were used as boundary conditions
of the second kind for the porous material. Transport in the porous material was then solved. The
temperature and moisture distribution in the porous material provided new boundary conditions for the
air side for the next time step. This procedure was repeated until the final drying time is reached.
This explicit time marching procedure was also used by Murugesan et al. [34]. They developed a 2D
finite element model to study the drying behaviour of ceramic brick. It was stated that buoyancy can
have a significant effect on the transport mechanism in the air and must be taken into account by
allowing changes of the flow field over time.
When explicit coupling procedures are used, two separate solvers can be used. This brings along the
advantage that two separately developed models can be coupled and the developer of the drying
model should only be concerned with the implementation of the coupling procedure. For example
Gnoth et al. [35] developed a coupling procedure between a CFD model developed for cavities and a
commercially available HAM model, Delphin® [22].

[[PAGE 8]]
Defraeye et al. [11] coupled the commercial CFD package Fluent® with an in house developed HAM
model HAMFEM [36]. When using an explicit coupling procedure, too large time steps will cause
instability. Time steps should be small so that heat and mass fluxes at the material boundary do not
change during a time step. Defraeye improved convergence by using an adaptive time stepping
algorithm. This ensured that the optimal time step was used during the simulations. Nevertheless a
long computational time was still needed even for relatively simple cases.
In literature, examples can be found where an implicit coupling is used for the heat and moisture
transport equations. The unsteadiness that the explicit models are facing, is overcome and a
significant reduction of computational time is noticed. De Bonis et al. [37] developed a finite element
model using a commercial finite element package to study the performance of the drying process of
fresh-cut vegetables. Lamnatou et al. [38, 39] developed a finite volume model to study the drying of
apple slices.
Finally a hybrid approach is reported in literature. Saneinejad et al. [16] coupled a model for heat and
mass transport with a commercial CFD model (Fluent®) and a radiation model to study the heat and
moisture transport in a street canyon. Instead of calculating the fluxes at the air side and passing them
to the material side explicitly, the transfer coefficients were calculated first at the air side. These
transfer coefficients were then passed to the material side where they were implemented as an implicit
boundary condition. This significantly improved convergence and solution stability.

    3. Coupled heat and moisture model including vapour and liquid water transport

          3.1. Moisture transport in porous materials
Moisture in a building context can exist in three phases: vapour, liquid and solid (ice). In the present
model ice and ice formation are neglected. The two remaining phases can both be stored and
transported in a porous material. The moisture content in the porous material w is the sum of the
vapour content wv and the liquid content wl. The vapour content is much smaller than the liquid content
and is often neglected. The moisture flux in the material g is the result of a vapour flux g v and liquid
flux gl. This is of course only an approximation since both transport mechanisms can strictly speaking
not be separated. Convection of air in the porous material is neglected. The vapour diffusion flux in a
porous material can be described by an adjusted Fick's diffusion law.

                                                                                                      (1)

.
In this equation the total pressure is assumed constant, allowing the use of partial vapour pressure pv
instead of mass fraction Y as driving potential. For very small pores vapour diffusion can no longer be
described by Fick's law. At these small scales collisions of vapour molecules and pore walls become
more frequent than collisions between molecules. The vapour transport is than referred to as Knudsen
diffusion or effusion. This Knudsen diffusion is also driven by vapour pressure gradients. To simplify
the current model, the Knudsen diffusion is not modelled separately but its effect is assumed to be
incorporated in the vapour diffusion resistance factor.
In these equations for diffusion the thermal diffusion or Soret effect is neglected. It was stated in Ref.
[40] and shown by Whitaker [41] and Janssen [42] that this effect is small compared to the
concentration diffusion.

The liquid flux is described by Darcy's law:

                                                                                                      (2)

The driving force for the liquid transport is the gradient in capillary pressure.. The moisture transport
equation then results in:

[[PAGE 9]]
(3)

It is now possible to transform this equation so that only two independent state variables remain. In
this work temperature and capillary pressure are used in analogy to the work of Grunewald [43]. The
partial vapour pressure is related to the relative humidity (RH = p v/pvsat) and this relative humidity is in
turn related to the capillary pressure by Kelvin’s law (Eq. (4)).

                                                                                                         (4)

This results in the following equation for the moisture balance in a porous material:

                                                                                                         (5)

To solve Eq. (5) three material properties are needed: the vapour diffusion resistance factor µ, the
liquid permeability Kl and the moisture capacity ∂w/∂pc.

        3.2. Heat transport in porous materials
Next the heat transport equations can be derived. Only transport by diffusion is assumed in the porous
materials that are studied here. Heat is thus only transported in the porous materials due to conduction
on the one hand and diffusion of moisture on the other hand. Water vapour diffusing through the
porous material transports sensible as well as latent heat.
Conductive heat transport in a (porous) material can be described by Fourier's law for heat
conduction:

                                                                                                         (6)

The conductivity of the porous material λmat is strongly dependent on the moisture content of the
material since the conductivity of water differs from that of the material matrix.
Water is transported through a porous material as liquid and vapour resulting in a liquid and vapour
flux. Along with the liquid water, sensible heat is transported while sensible and latent heat is
transported along with the vapour diffusion.
The potential energy and kinetic energy changes in the porous material can be neglected and no
chemical reactions occur in the material. The total energy of the porous material E is thus the sum of
the energy stored in the material matrix and the energy stored in the liquid water and water vapour
present in the material. The energy balance equation thus states that a change in stored energy is due
to heat conduction and transport of latent and sensible heat along with the moisture transport:

                                                                                                          (7)

ρmat and Cmat are the dry porous material’s density and heat capacity respectively. The liquid moisture
content and vapour moisture content can be linked to the total moisture by the open porosity, taking
into account that:

                                                                                                         (8)

and

[[PAGE 10]]
(9)

        3.3. Mass fraction or capillary pressure?
When only vapour diffusion is considered, the mass fraction of water vapour can be used as transport
potential as for example proposed by Steeman et al. [9]. However using mass fraction as transport
potential in a porous material when liquid transport is present, causes some difficulties as will be
discussed in this section.

Transforming Darcy’s law (Eq. (2)) for liquid transport from capillary pressure p c to mass fraction Y
results in:

                                                                                                    (10)

with

                                                                                                    (11)

                                                                                                    (12)

It is thus mathematically possible to write Eq. (5) with mass fraction and temperature as the
transported variables instead of capillary pressure and temperature. Difficulties in solving this model
arise however when relative humidities near to 100% are encountered. This high relative humidity is
typical when liquid moisture transport is present. Fig. 2 illustrates what happens when the mass
fraction is near to the saturation mass fraction. This figure shows a psychometric chart with the mass
fraction on the vertical axis and the temperature on the horizontal axis. The figure starts from a state
below the saturation line (situation ①). When the temperature is lowered, the mass fraction in the
porous material is constant at first. The state of the porous material moves along a horizontal line from
situation ① to situation ②. In situation ② the saturation mass fraction is reached. At temperature T 2
the air in the porous material cannot hold more water vapour than Y2. If the temperature would drop
further to T3, the mass fraction of water vapour in air is obliged to follow the saturation line. This
implies that at saturation the mass fraction becomes temperature dependent. However for a good
numerically solvable model, the transported variables should be independent.
As long as the relative humidity stays well below saturation, the state of the porous material can be
described by the mass fraction Y. This is the case when only vapour transport is considered and when
temperature changes are small. Steeman [9] confined his work to these conditions and was thus able
to use mass fraction and temperature as transported variables for moisture and energy respectively.
Using mass fraction as transported variable is also allowed for isothermal liquid transport in porous
materials. However, the assumption of isothermal conditions rarely holds. As an example the drying of
a nearly saturated porous material is discussed.
A wet material that is nearly saturated will have a mass fraction of water vapour close to saturation
and the relative humidity in the material will be almost 100%. During a convective drying process,
water evaporates from the surface into the air flowing over the porous material. The amount of energy
needed for this phase change (from liquid to vapour state) is the latent heat of evaporation. This
energy is taken from the surrounding air and the porous material, thus resulting in a temperature drop
of the material. When no other heat sources are present, the temperature of the porous material
surface can drop to the wet bulb temperature. This temperature drop can be significant (e.g. air at
30°C and 40% RH has a wet bulb temperature of ± 20°C). Since the mass fraction was already near
saturation, a sudden drop in the temperature would mean that the mass fraction would also have to
decrease. In other words the mass fraction becomes temperature dependent. The mass fraction

[[PAGE 11]]
modelling approach proposed by Steeman [9] is thus no longer applicable for liquid transport
phenomena such as convective drying.
From this discussion it is clear that the mass fraction cannot be used as the transported variable if
liquid transport is included. Therefore the capillary pressure is proposed as the transported variable.
The capillary pressure is not restricted by saturation conditions and is a better way to describe the
state of a wet (nearly saturated) porous material.

        3.4. Numerical implementation of the boundary conditions

As boundary conditions at the porous surfaces facing the air, heat and mass fluxed are imposed.
These fluxes are calculated using Eqs. (13) and (14):

                                                                                                      (13)
                                                                                                      (14)

Tref and Yref are reference values for temperature and mass fraction taken outside the boundary layer
and Ts and Ys are the temperature and mass fraction at the surface of the porous material.
The differential equations describing heat and moisture transport in the porous material are solved
numerically together with the boundary conditions using a finite volume solver. Therefore the problem
is discretized in time and space. To obtain a converged solution several iterations are needed within
each time step. When the current iteration is indicated with superscript m and the next iteration is
indicated with superscript m+1, the flux boundary conditions can be written as:

                                                                                                      (15)
                                                                                                      (16)

This is the so-called implicit formulation. For the heat transport equation temperature is the transported
variable which allows the direct implementation of Eq. (15). However the mass transport equations use
capillary pressure as transported variable, thus Eq. (16) has to be reformulated to capillary pressure.
The mass fraction at the boundary Ys is a non-linear function of the capillary pressure. However Eq.
                                   m
(16) can be linearized around Ys .

                                                                                                      (17)

    4. Experimental validation

The coupled heat and moisture model is validated by means of a convective drying experiment from
literature [11]. In what follows, it will be shown that heat and mass transport cannot be solved
separately when studying convective drying. At the same time drying rates are strongly determined by
convective transport in the air.
In the first section, the experimental setup will be shortly described. Next, the simulation results of the
coupled model are compared with the experimental data. Finally, neutron radiography measurements
showing the moisture distribution in the brick sample were compared with the results of the coupled
model.

[[PAGE 12]]
4.1. Experimental setup
Defraeye [11] constructed a small wind tunnel from transparent polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) to
perform convective drying experiments on building materials such as ceramic brick. A schematic
representation of the wind tunnel with the test section is found in Fig. 3a. Air is drawn in by a fan,
passes over a flow straightener (honeycomb) and flows through a convergent section before entering
the test section. A detail of the test section is found in Fig. 3b.

The sample of ceramic brick measuring 10mm by 30mm by 90mm, was placed in a container of
plexiglass (PMMA). The plexiglass had a thickness of 4mm. The sample of ceramic brick was wetted
and placed in the wind tunnel in such a way that the top surface of the sample faces the air flowing
through the tunnel. The sample was wetted to a moisture content of 126kg/m³ which corresponds
approximately to the capillary moisture content (130kg/m³). At the bottom of the container a layer of
20mm XPS insulation was installed. The front and back side of the container were covered with 15mm
of XPS insulation, the side walls of the brick sample were insulated with 30mm of XPS. The sides of
the sample were made impermeable for moisture. The open circuit wind tunnel was placed in a climate
chamber where the mean temperature was set to 23.8°C (with a standard deviation of 0.2°C) and the
mean relative humidity was set to 44% (with a standard deviation of 0.8%).

In the experiments, dry air flows over the top surface of the brick and the brick is dried out from one
side, while the other sides are impermeable for moisture. During the drying experiment temperatures
at the side of the ceramic brick were measured with thermocouples. Fig. 3a shows the location of
these thermocouples. In total 6 thermocouples were installed at a side wall. The temperature was
measured at a depth of 10mm, 20mm and 30mm from the material-air interface and 10mm in the
lower insulation (at 40mm from the interface). To measure the inflow effect and the effect of a
developing moisture and temperature boundary layer, a thermocouple was installed upstream and
downstream of the centre thermocouples, both at a depth of 10mm. The accuracy of the
thermocouples, as reported by Defraeye [11] was 0.1°C. The weight change of the test sample was
continuously monitored by a balance. The balance was calibrated to an accuracy of 0.01g but in
practice this accuracy was found to be 0.1g due to the impact of airflow on the balance. The velocity at
the inlet of the test section and the turbulence intensity were measured with a PIV (particle image
velocimetry) system. Defraeye [11] performed an extensive study on the accuracy of these PIV
measurements. He concluded that a quantitative estimate of the uncertainty of the PIV measurements
is difficult because of the presence of different sources of error in these measurement. Therefore best
practice guidelines were followed. To obtain a reliable time-averaged mean air velocity, sufficient
statistically independent double PIV images have to be taken. In his study 120 images at 2Hz were
found to be sufficient. This led to an uncertainty of about 2% on the mean air velocity.
The test section can be assumed symmetric along the x-axis since the flow in the channel was found
to be two-dimensional due to the high width to height ratio [44].

        4.2. Simulation model and settings

The experiments of Defraeye were used as a validation study for the newly developed coupled heat
and moisture model. Preliminary simulations showed that 1D and 2D simulations were not sufficient to
capture the heat and mass transport in the setup accurately and to incorporate phenomena such as
the leading edge effect [10]. Therefore, a complex 3D simulation model of the brick was developed
including the insulation and plexiglass out of which the sample container is built up.
Fig. 4 shows a 3D view of the test sample of ceramic brick embedded in the insulation and the
plexiglass. The sample of ceramic brick measured 10mm thick by 30mm deep by 90mm long. Only
half of the setup has been modelled due to symmetry, which considerably reduced the computational
effort.

[[PAGE 13]]
The inlet conditions of the air were measured by Defraeye [11]: the air inlet temperature was 23.8°C
(with a standard deviation of 0.2°C) and the air inlet relative humidity was 44% (with a standard
deviation of 0.8%). The temperature of the surroundings was constant and corresponded to the
temperature of the climatic chamber (23.8°C).
The side faces facing the climate chamber (bottom, front, back and left face) of the setup were
assumed impermeable for moisture. Moisture exchange is only possible at the top face. Heat can flow
through all faces. At the side walls the heat flux is determined by Eq.(13), with Ts the temperature at
the outer surface of the plexiglass and T ref the temperature of the surroundings (i.e. 23.8°C). The heat
transfer coefficient h is estimated at 8 W/m²K and incorporates both the effect of convection and
radiation.

Due to the 2D airflow in the wind tunnel, the heat and mass transfer at the top face of the brick was
assumed two-dimensional and varied along the length of the duct. The corresponding heat and mass
transfer coefficients used for the simulations were determined by means of CFD simulations of the
wind tunnel assuming a constant temperature at the bottom. Defraeye measured the velocity profile
and turbulent intensity at the inlet of the test setup [11]. Fig. 5 shows these measured values for
velocity and turbulent intensity. These measurements were used as input for the CFD simulation,
together with the measured temperature and humidity.
The computational domain for the CFD simulation of the air flow was taken similar to that used by
Defraeye [11] for his simulations. A 2D channel was simulated, corresponding to flow between two
parallel plates. The channel had a height of 10mm as depicted in Fig. 3a. An inflow section of 15mm
was taken and an outflow section of 30mm. These sections were adiabatic and impermeable for
moisture. An appropriate grid was built consisting out of 4x10³ quadrilateral control volumes. The grid
was dense near the surfaces of the parallel plates and coarser to the centre. Steady Reynolds-
averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) was used in combination with a turbulence model. Here the
realizable k-ε model was used with LRNM to take care of the viscosity affected region. Second order
discretisation schemes were used. The SIMPLE algorithm was used for pressure-velocity coupling.
Pressure interpolation was second order.
The mass transfer coefficient was determined through the heat and mass analogy. This analogy was
shown to be valid by Defraeye [11] and by preliminary studies [10]. Especially during the constant
drying rate period, when the temperature and moisture mass fraction at the surface are almost
constant, this analogy applies. A power-law approximation of these coefficients as a function of the
position in the duct is given by Eq. (18) a and b.

                                                                                                   (18a)

                                                                                                   (18b)

Radiation at the brick-air interface was taken into account in a simplified way by assuming that the
brick top surface only sees the upper wall of the wind tunnel, which results in a view factor of 1. The
temperature of the top wall of the wind tunnel was measured. An average value of 23.3°C was found.
The radiant heat flux at the brick-air interface can be calculated as:

                                                                                                     (19)

With qrad (W/m²) the radiant heat flux between the roof of the wind tunnel and the brick surface, T roof
the temperature at the top wall of the wind tunnel, T s the surface temperature of the brick and 1 and 2
the emissivity of the roof and the brick surface, which are assumed to be 0.97 and 0.93 respectively.

For these simulations a grid sizing 114x93x35 was used (371070 cells). The grid was denser near the
top. A grid independency test was carried out by performing a simulation with a denser grid. This
simulation showed no significant difference with the original grid. Therefore, the original grid of

[[PAGE 14]]
114x93x35 was retained for the current simulations. For these transient simulations a time step of 60
seconds was taken. In total a drying period of 12 hours was simulated, resulting in a total of 720 time
steps.

The material properties of ceramic brick that have been used in the simulations are shown in Table 1.
They have been determined experimentally by Ref. [45]. The vapour diffusion coefficient v was
approximated by Eq. (20) and the moisture retention curve w(pc) was formulated by Eq. (21) [45]:

                                                                                                      (20)

                                                                                                      (21)

The liquid permeability Kl is given by Eq. (22) [45]. The corresponding coefficients are listed in Table 2.

                                                                                                      (22)

        4.3. Comparison between simulations and experiments

Temperature change and scaled mass loss

Temperatures measured at depths of 10mm, 20mm, 30mm (at the interface brick/insulation) and
40mm (10mm in the insulation) are compared with the simulations. Fig. 6 compares the measured
temperatures with the simulations. The dashed line shows the simulation outcome using the original
material properties as reported in Table 1 and Eqs. (20)-(22). The red and green lines in Fig. 6 are
explained in Section 4.4. A measurement uncertainty of 0.1°C was reported [11] and is indicated in
Fig. 6.
Overall a good agreement between the model and the experiments is found. The largest deviations
are found near the surface. The temperature at a depth of 10mm is slightly underestimated by the
model (0.3-0.4°C). Also the onset of the FRP (when the temperature starts to rise again) is delayed in
the simulations (see Fig. 6(a)-(c)). This leads to a temperature mismatch of up to 1°C between
measured and predicted temperatures. Nevertheless, the equilibrium temperature (the lowest
temperatures in Fig. 6) is closely approximated by the model (within the error bars). Deeper in the
material, the approximation becomes even better. At a depth of 40mm (10mm in the insulation), the
agreement is almost perfect (within the error bars). This indicates that the applied boundary conditions
closely approach reality.

Fig. 7 compares the measurements and simulation results of the temperatures along the length of the
sample at a depth of 10mm in the sample. Although there is no perfect match between simulations
and experiments the trends are well predicted: the upstream temperature reaches the same
equilibrium temperature as the centre temperature both in the simulations and the measurements.
However dry-out occurs sooner upstream which results in a faster occurring temperature rise
upstream. Downstream the temperature is higher both in the measurements and in the simulations.
The onset of dry-out happens later here and this delays the temperature rise.

During the experiments, the weight change of the sample was also monitored (Fig. 8). The mass loss
was scaled using the initial moisture content of the brick sample: i.e. 3.4g. Due to this small initial

[[PAGE 15]]
moisture content and relative high weight of the sample and test section itself (i.e. ± 827 g), the weight
change was difficult to measure. An uncertainty of 0.1g on the weight measurement was reported [11],
the uncertainty on the weight change was 0.14g. This resulted in an uncertainty of 4% on the scaled
mass loss.
The experiments clearly show a constant slope in the mass loss curve for the first three hours (Figure
8). During this initial drying rate period (CRP) the moisture content in the brick decreases linearly. A
similar duration was found in the simulations. Next, the FRP starts: this is shown by a decreasing
slope of the mass loss curve in Fig. 8. Comparison of the measurements and the simulations shows
that the mass loss during the CRP is well-predicted but that there is an overestimation of the mass
loss during the FRP.

Moisture distribution profiles

It is clear from the previous analysis that the model is able to predict the correct trends but that there is
still a significant deviation between the measured and predicted mass loss. To explain the cause for
this deviation, measurement data are needed of the moisture distribution inside the brick. Data
provided by the Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology (EMPA) was
therefore used to further study the moisture transport in the ceramic brick. With neutron radiography
this research group was able to measure the moisture content evolution in the ceramic brick over the
depth of the sample. More details on the used measurement setup can be found in Refs. [46-48].
Fig. 9a shows the comparison of the moisture content distribution in the ceramic brick over time for the
simulation and the measurements. This comparison shows that during the first hours the agreement is
fairly good, but at later times (after 3 hours) the simulation shows a faster decrease of the moisture
content compared to the measurements. This is in agreement with the mass measurements and
simulation shown in Fig. 8, which showed a good agreement during the CRP (first 3 hours) and
afterwards an overestimation of the simulated mass loss.
It should be noted that for a correct comparison between the measured and the modelled moisture
content only the central region in the brick, between 0.5cm and 2.5cm, should be compared. This is
due to some scattering that was present in the neutron radiography measurements. This resulted in a
falsely decreasing moisture content at the bottom of the sample and a too fast decreasing moisture
content at the top.

        4.4. Influence of material properties

Material properties have a large impact on these simulations. Correct material properties play a major
role in the validation process, since uncertainty on material properties can be large and the
consequences correspondingly. Previous studies have already shown that the hygric material
properties, namely retention curve, permeability and water vapour resistance diffusion factor are the
most important [11,49,50]. Fig. 8 shows a systematic overestimation of the mass loss in the brick,
which raises the suspicion that the deviation is caused by uncertainties in the material properties.
Defraeye did not list uncertainties on the measured material properties that he provided in his study
[11], but he performed a similar study [50] on ceramic brick. In this paper standard deviations on the
measured material properties were listed. Table 3 lists these standard deviations as reported by
Defraeye [50].
The comparison of measurements and simulations in Figs.6 and 8 showed that the first drying period
is well captured. This suggests that the permeability and the retention curve at high moisture contents
agree well with reality. The large deviations occur during the second drying rate period.
To investigate the effect of the material properties on the modelling outcome, the main parameters
(permeability, retention curve and water vapour resistance diffusion factor) were examined closer. First
of all it was found that increasing the water vapour resistance diffusion factor from 24.79 to 32 had no
significant impact on the mass loss in the brick and on the moisture distribution.

[[PAGE 16]]
Next the vapour retention curve was adjusted in such a way that the curve only changed at high
capillary pressures, so it would not affect the drying behaviour during the first drying period. Fig. 10
shows the original retention curve as found by Ref. [45] and the adjusted curve. The adjusted moisture
retention curve can be formulated by Eq. (23).

                                                                                                     (23)

Fig. 9b shows the simulation results of the moisture distribution for the adjusted moisture retention
curve. When comparing Fig. 9b with Fig. 9a, a better agreement is shown when the retention curve is
adjusted. However, the agreement only improves for the overall moisture content in the brick. The
distribution of the moisture content deviates from the one measured by neutron radiography. For the
altered retention curve the drying front moves too fast into the brick compared to the measurements.
Adjusting the retention curve thus improves the overall moisture content prediction, as also shown in
Fig. 8, but does not improve the moisture content distribution. This suggests that deviations between
measurements and simulations with the original material data cannot solely be caused by
uncertainties in the estimated retention curve.
To further study this, the liquid permeability was also altered. The original retention curve [45] and the
adjusted curve are shown in Fig. 11. The adjusted liquid permeability can be approximated with Eq.
(22) and by using “wi adjusted” instead of “wi” as listed in Table 2.
By lowering the permeability, a better agreement can be found between measurements and
simulations as shown in Fig. 9c. The agreement is also better for the overall moisture content (Fig. 8).
Although uncertainty exists on all material parameters, in this case it is most likely that the largest
deviations are caused by the uncertainty on the liquid permeability.

Of course some deviations between the measurements and the simulations can still be observed after
the material properties are adjusted. This can be mainly attributed to uncertainties in the implemented
boundary and initial conditions.
During the simulations, the heat transfer coefficient at the side walls was estimated and the inlet
temperature was assumed to be constant, though in reality the temperature varied slightly. Also an
uncertainty of 2% on the inlet velocity profile that was measured using PIV, was found [11].
Finally it can be stated that some of the deviations are caused by uncertainty in the numerical
modelling, but this is rather difficult to quantify. Only an improvement of the modelling techniques can
overcome or reduce this uncertainty. Possible uncertainties arising from the numerical model are:
    - Errors caused by discretisation
    - Errors caused by simplifications in the model (simplified radiation modelling, assuming perfect
         straight and aligned surfaces, assuming constant transfer coefficients at some surfaces…)
Of course, a model is always a simplification of reality. The art of modelling is to apply the correct
choices for simplifications so that the simulation result is acceptably close to reality.

        4.5. Discussion

Fig. 8 compares the mass loss computed with the original material data and the mass loss computed
with the adjusted retention curve and liquid permeability. Both changes agree well with the mass loss
measurements. But, as shown in Fig. 9, a good prediction of the mass loss does not imply a good
prediction of the moisture content distribution. It can thus be stated that both mass loss and moisture
distribution predictions should be validated before a conclusion can be drawn on the correctness of
the model and the used material properties.
Nevertheless, a good agreement for moisture does not guarantee a good agreement for temperature
as is seen in Fig. 6. Since heat and moisture transport in porous materials are strongly coupled,
changes in retention curve or liquid permeability have consequences for both temperature and
moisture distribution. Where before the model underestimated the temperature, the model now seems
to overestimate the temperature both for the adjusted retention curve and the adjusted liquid
permeability. Since the model with the adjusted retention curve and the model with the adjusted

[[PAGE 17]]
permeability result in similar mass loss curves (Fig. 8), the drying rates for both cases will be similar.
And since the temperature in the brick is to a great extent determined by the drying rate due to the
latent heat loss, the predicted temperature curves are similar for both cases.
The original model thus underpredicts the temperature whereas the adjusted models overpredict the
temperature. However, the magnitude of difference between measurements and simulations for the
original case and the altered cases is similar. The model with an adjusted retention curve and the
model with an adjusted permeability do not result in a worse agreement of temperature, but at the
same time there is also no improvement. It is thus difficult to make a sound conclusion on the impact
that the adjustments have on the temperature course in the material.

     5. Conclusion
In this paper a newly developed coupled heat and moisture model including vapour and liquid
moisture transport was presented. The model enables to describe the coupled heat and mass transfer
in porous building materials. Contrary to some heat and moisture models that only include vapour
transport, the newly developed model has a broader application range, as it can be used to study
vapour diffusion through porous materials and capillary moisture transport. The model lends itself to
study the drying phenomena of porous materials.
In this paper the new model was described and validated against a drying experiment from literature,
in which ceramic brick is used as a porous material. The validation study showed that the experimental
results agreed well with the simulations results of a 3D model. Nevertheless, some deviations could be
noted which were attributed to uncertainty of the material properties, especially of the liquid
permeability and retention curve. By altering the liquid permeability or retention curve, the agreement
between simulations and measurements improved.
Comparison with neutron radiography measurements revealed that a good agreement of the overall
moisture content does not guarantee a good agreement of the moisture distribution in the porous
material. The moisture distribution measurements showed that the best agreement was found for an
adjusted liquid permeability. Adjusting the sorption isotherm resulted in a drying front moving too fast
into the porous material.

Acknowledgements

The results presented in this paper were obtained within the frame the research project IWT-
SB/81322/Van Belleghem funded by the Flemish Institute for the Promotion and Innovation by Science
and Technology in Flanders and IWT SBO-050451 project Heat, Air and Moisture Performance
Engineering: A Whole Building Approach. Their financial support is gratefully acknowledged.
Special thanks go to Prof. Dominique Derome and Dr. Peter Moonen from EMPA Zurich and to Dr.
Thijs Defraeye form KULeuven for their willingness to provide some of the necessary measurement
data.

References

[1] L. Fang, G. Clausen, P.O. Fanger. Impact of temperature and humidity on the perception of indoor
air quality. Indoor Air, 8:80-90, 1998.
[2] C. J. Simonson, M. Salonvaara, T. Ojanen. The effects of structures on indoor humidity e possibility
to improve comfort and perceived air quality. Indoor Air, 12:243-51, 2002.
[3] N. Mendes, F.C. Winkelmann, R. Lamberts and P.C. Philippi. Moisture effects on conduction loads.
Energy and Buildings, 35(7):631–644, 2003.
[4] O.F.Osanyintola and C.J. Simonson. Moisture buffering capacity of hygroscopic building materials:
experimental facilities and energy impact. Energy and Buildings, 38(10):1270-82, 2006.
[5] E. Vereecken and S. Roels. Review of mould prediction models and their influence on mould risk
evaluation. Building and Environment, 51(0):296-310, 2012.
[6] M. Woloszyn and C. Rode. IEA ANNEX41 Whole Building Heat, Air and Moisture Response -
Subtask1: Modelling Principles and Common Exercises. Technical report, 2008.

[[PAGE 18]]
[7] M. Steeman, A. Janssens, H.-J. Steeman, M. Van Belleghem, M. De Paepe. On coupling 1D non-
isothermal heat and mass transfer in porous materials with a multizone building energy simulation
model. Building and Environment, 45:865-77, 2010
[8] M. Steeman, M. Van Belleghem, M. De Paepe and A. Janssens. Experimental validation and
sensitivity analysis of a coupled BES-HAM model. Building and Environment, 45(10):2202-2217, 2010.
[9] H.-J. Steeman, M. Van Belleghem, A. Janssens, M. De Paepe. Coupled simulation of heat and
moisture transport in air and porous materials for the assessment of moisture related damage.
Building and Environment, 44(10):2176-84, 2009.
[10] M. Van Belleghem. Modelling coupled heat and moisture transfer between air and porous
materials for building applications. PhD thesis. Ghent University, Belgium, 2013.
[11] T. Defraeye. Convective Heat and Mass Transfer at Exterior Building Surfaces. PhD thesis,
KULeuven, Belgium, 2011.
[12] M. Van Belleghem, M. Steeman, A. Willockx, A. Janssens and M. De Paepe. Benchmark
experiments for moisture transfer modelling in air and porous materials. Building and Environment,
46(4):884-898, 2011.
[13] L. H.Mortensen, M. Woloszyn, C. Rode and R. Peuhkuri. Investigation of microclimate by CFD
modeling of moisture interactions between air and constructions. Journal of Building Physics,
30(4):279–315, 2007.
[14] T. Defraeye, B. Blocken, and J. Carmeliet. Analysis of convective heat and mass transfer
coefficients for convective drying of a porous flat plate by conjugate modelling. International Journal of
Heat and Mass Transfer, 55(1-3):112–124, 2012.
[15] T. Defraeye, G. Houvenaghel, J. Carmeliet and D. Derome. Numerical analysis of convective
drying of gypsum boards. International Journal Heat and Mass Transfer 55(9-10): 2590-2600, 2012.
[16] S. Saneinejad, P. Moonen, T. Defraeye, D. Derome and J. Carmeliet. Coupled CFD, radiation and
porous media transport model for evaluating evaporative cooling in an urban environment. Journal of
Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 104(0): 455-463, 2012.
[17] M. Van Belleghem, M. Steeman, A. Janssens and M. De Paepe. Heat, air and moisture transport
modelling in ventilated cavity walls. Submitted to Journal of Building Physics. 2013.
[18] P. C. D. Milly. Moisture and heat transport in hysteretic, in homogeneous porous media: a matrix
head-based formulation and a numerical model. Water Resources Research—Water Resources
Research, 18(3):489–98, 1982.
[19] K. Abahri, R. Belarbi and A. Trabelsi. Contribution to analytical and numerical study of combined
heat and moisture transfers in porous building materials. Building and Environment, 46(7):1354–1360,
2011.
[20] K. A. Landman, L. Pel and E.F. Kaasschieter. Analytic modelling of drying of porous materials.
Mathematical Engineering in Industry, 8(2):89–122, 2001.
[21] D. Zirkelbach, T. Schmidt, H. M. Künzel, M. Kehrer and C. Bludau. WUFI 2D, 2007.
[22] Bauklimatik Dresden. Delphin. http://bauklimatik-dresden.de/delphin/index.php.
Simulation program for the calculation of coupled heat, moisture, air, pollutant, and salt transport.
[23] D. Berger and D. C. T. Pei. Drying of hygroscopic capillary porous solids - a theoretical approach.
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 16:293–302, 1973.
[24] W. Masmoudi and M. Prat. Heat and Mass-Transfer between a Porous- Medium and a Parallel
External Flow - Application to Drying of Capillary Porous Materials. International Journal of Heat and
Mass Transfer, 34(8):1975–1989, 1991.
[25] V.P.C. Mohan and P. Talukdar. Three dimensional numerical modeling of simultaneous heat and
moisture transfer in a moist object subjected to convective drying. International Journal of Heat and
Mass Transfer, 53(21-22):4638–4650, 2010.
[26] H. Shokouhmand, V. Abdollahi, S. Hosseini and K. Vahidkhah. Performance Optimization of a
Brick Dryer Using Porous Simulation Approach. Drying Technology, 29(3):360–370, 2011.
[27] A. Kaya, O. AydIn and I. Dincer. Numerical modeling of heat and mass transfer during forced
convection drying of rectangular moist objects. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer,
49(17-18):3094–3103, 2006.
[28] L. S. Oliveira and K. Haghighi. Conjugate heat and mass transfer in convective drying of porous
media. Numerical Heat Transfer, Part A: Applications, 34(2):105–117, 1998.
[29] T. Defraeye, B. Blocken, D. Derome, B. Nicolai and J. Carmeliet. Convective heat and mass
transfer modelling at air–porous material interfaces: Overview of existing methods and relevance.
Chemical Engineering Science 74:49-58, 2012
[30] H. Amir, G.Le Palec and M. Daguenet. S´echage superficiel d’un matériau poreux humide par
convection forcée d’air chaud: couplage entre les équations de transfert dans le matériau et celles de
la couche limite. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 30(6):1149–1158, 1987.

[[PAGE 19]]
[31] B. Zeghmati, M. Daguenet, and G. Le Palec. Study of transient laminar free convection over an
inclined wet flat plate. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 34(4/5):899–909, 1991.
[32] A. A. Dolinskiy, A. S. H. Dorfman, and B. V. Davydenko. Conjugate heat and mass transfer in
continuous processes of convective drying. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer,
34(11):2883–2889, 1991.
[33] L. S. Oliveira and K. Haghighi. Conjugate Heat and Mass Transport in Convective Drying of
Multiparticle Systems Part II: Soybean Drying. Drying Technology, 16(3-5):463–483, 1998.
[34] K. Murugesan, H. N. Suresh, K. N. Seetharamu, P. A. A. Narayana, and T. Sundararajan. A
theoretical model of brick drying as a conjugate problem. International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer, 44(21):4075–4086, 2001.
[35] S. Gnoth, F. Hansel, P. Hupl, and H. Fechner. Aero-hygrothermisches Verhalten von
Umfassungskonstruktionen mit Hohlrumen. Bauphysik, 30(6):380–388, 2008.
[36] H. Janssen, B. Blocken, and J. Carmeliet. Conservative modelling of the moisture and heat
transfer in building components under atmospheric excitation. International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer, 50(5-6):1128–1140, 2007.
[37] M. V. De Bonis and G. Ruocco. A generalized conjugate model for forced convection drying
based on an evaporative kinetics. Journal of Food Engineering, 89(2):232–240, 2008.
[38] C. Lamnatou, E. Papanicolaou, V. Belessiotis, and N. Kyriakis. Finitevolume modelling of heat
and mass transfer during convective drying of porous bodies - Non-conjugate and conjugate
formulations involving the aerodynamic effects. Renewable Energy, 35(7):1391–1402, 2010.
[39] C. Lamnatou, E. Papanicolaou, V. Belessiotis, and N. Kyriakis. Numerical study of the interaction
among a pair of blunt plates subject to convective drying - A conjugate approach. International Journal
of Thermal Sciences, 49(12):2467–2482, 2010.
[40] K.M. Waananen, J.B. Litchfield and M.R. Okos. 1993, Classification of drying models for porous
solids. Drying Technology, 11(1):1-40, 1993.
[41] S. Whitaker. The role of irreversible thermodynamics and the Onsager relations in the analysis of
drying phenomena. Proc. sixth International Drying Symposium IDS'88, 1988.
[42] H. Janssen 2011. Thermal diffusion of water vapour in porous materials: Fact or fiction?
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 54(7-8):1548-1562, 2011.
[43] J. Grunewald. Diffusiver und konvektiver Stoff - und Energietransport in kapillarporösen
Baustoffen. PhD. Technischen Universität dresden, 1997.
[44] R. B. Dean. Reynolds Number Dependence of Skin Friction and Other Bulk Flow Variables in
Two-Dimensional Rectangular Duct Flow. Journal of Fluids Engineering, 100(2):215–223, 1978.
[45] H. Derluyn, H. Janssen, P. Moonen and J. Carmeliet. moisture transfer across the interface
                                                        th
between brick and mortar joint. Proceedings of the 8 Symposium on Building Physics in Nordic
Countries (NSB2008), Copenhagen, June 16-18, 2008.
[46] H. Derluyn, M. Griffa, D. Mannes, I. Jerjen, J. Dewanckele, P. Vontobel, A. Sheppard, M. N.
Boone, D. Derome, E. H. Lehmann and J. Carmeliet. Probing salt crystallization damage mechanisms
in porous limestone with neutron radiography and X-ray tomography. In 5th International Building
Physics Conference (IBPC2012), Kyoto, Japan, 2012.
[47] M. Sedighi-Gilani, M. Griffa, D. Mannes, E. Lehmann, J. Carmeliet and D. Derome. Visualization
and quantification of liquid water transport in softwood by means of neutron radiography. International
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 55(21-22):6211–6221, 2012.
[48] E.H. Lehmann, G. Frei, G. Khne and P. Boillat. The micro-setup for neutron imaging: A major
step forward to improve the spatial resolution. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research
Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 576(23):389–396,
2007.
[49] M. Van Belleghem, H.-J. Steeman, M. Steeman, A. Janssens and M. De Paepe. Sensitivity
analysis of CFD coupled non-isothermal heat and moisture modelling. Building and Environment,
45(11):2485-2496, 2010.
[50] T. Defraeye, B. Blocken and J. Carmeliet. Influence of uncertainty in heat-moisture transport
properties on convective drying of porous materials by numerical modelling. Chemical Engineering
Research and Design, 91:36-42, 2013
[51] Mujumdar AS. Handbook of industrial drying. 3th ed. CRC Press; 2007.

[[PAGE 20]]
List of Figures

Fig. 1. Typical surface averaged drying rate (the dashed line indicates the drying rate in case the initial
temperature is higher or lower than the wet bulb temperature), based on [51].

Fig. 2. Psychrometric chart, saturation mass fraction indicated in blue.

Fig. 3. Schematic representation of wind tunnel and test section used to perform drying experiments.
Based on [11].
     (a) Wind tunnel side view and top view
     (b) Model of test section of experimental setup

Fig. 4. 3D simulation model of the test sample.

Fig. 5. Velocity profile (m/s) and turbulent intensity (-) as measured by Defraeye [11].

Fig. 6. Comparison between heat and moisture transport model with original material data (- -), model
with adjusted retention curve (---) and model with adjusted liquid permeability (---). Temperature
measurement indicated by (▪).
     (a) Temperature at 10mm in the brick
     (b) Temperature at 20mm in the brick
     (c) Temperature at 30mm, at bottom of brick
     (d) Temperature at 40mm, 10mm in insulation

Fig. 7. Simulated temperature in the ceramic brick, upstream of the centre (blue), in the centre (black)
and downstream (red). Comparison with measurements upstream (o), centre (□) and downstream
(▲).

Fig. 8.Scaled mass loss. Comparison of experiment (▀), CFD-HAM simulation with original material
properties (--) , with adjusted retention curve (--) and adjusted liquid permeability (--).

Fig. 9. Comparison of the measured (--) and simulated (--) moisture content distribution in the ceramic
brick sample over time. Time difference between two lines is 1 h.
         (a) Moisture distribution when using the original material properties as reported by [46]
         (b) Moisture distribution when using an adjusted retention curve
         (c) Moisture distribution when using an adjusted liquid permeability

Fig. 10. Retention curve of brick: original curve [45] (--) and adjusted curve (- -).

Fig. 11. Liquid permeability of ceramic brick: original curve [45] (--) and adjusted curve (- -).

List of Tables

Table 1. Material properties of ceramic brick [45].

Table 2. Parameters in Eq. (22) [45].

Table 3 Standard deviations of material properties as listed by Ref. [50].

[[PAGE 21]]
Fig. 1. Typical surface averaged drying rate (the dashed line indicates the drying rate in case the initial
temperature is higher or lower than the wet bulb temperature), based on [51].

Fig. 2. Psychrometric chart, saturation mass fraction indicated in blue.

[[PAGE 22]]
(a) Wind tunnel side view and top view

                          (b) model of test section of experimental setup

Fig. 3. Schematic representation of wind tunnel and test section used to perform drying experiments.
                                           Based on [11].

[[PAGE 23]]
Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the 3D simulation model of the test sample.

Fig. 5. Velocity profile (m/s) and turbulent intensity (-) as measured by Defraeye [11].

[[PAGE 24]]
(a) Temperature at 10mm, in brick

(b) Temperature at 20mm, in brick

[[PAGE 25]]
(c) Temperature at 30mm, at bottom of brick

(d) Temperature at 40mm, 10mm in insulation

Fig. 6. Comparison between heat and moisture transport model with original material data (- -), model
   with adjusted retention curve (---) and model with adjusted liquid permeability (---). Temperature
                                     measurement indicated by (▪).

[[PAGE 26]]
Fig. 7. Simulated temperature in the ceramic brick, upstream of the centre (blue), in the centre (black)
  and downstream (red). Comparison with measurements upstream (o), centre (□) and downstream
                                                 (▲).

[[PAGE 27]]
Fig. 8.Scaled mass loss. Comparison of experiment (▀), CFD-HAM simulation with original material
        properties (--) , with adjusted retention curve (--) and adjusted liquid permeability (--).

[[PAGE 28]]
(a) Moisture distribution when using the original material properties as reported by [46]

(b) Moisture distribution when using an adjusted retention curve

(c) Moisture distribution when using an adjusted liquid permeability

Fig. 9. Comparison of the measured (--) and simulated (--) moisture content distribution in the ceramic
                  brick sample over time. Time difference between two lines is 1 h.

[[PAGE 29]]
Fig. 10. Retention curve of brick: original curve [45] (--) and adjusted curve (- -).

Fig. 11. Liquid permeability of ceramic brick: original curve [45] (--) and adjusted curve (- -).

[[PAGE 30]]
Table 1. Material properties of ceramic brick [45].
Property                                              Value
Density  [kg/m³]                                     2087
Thermal conductivity [W/mK]                         1 + 0.0047 w
Specific heat cp [J/kgK]                              840
Water vapour resistance diffusion factor dry [-]     24.79
Capillary moisture content wcap [kg/m³]               130
Open porosity 0 [-]                                  0.13

Table 2. Parameters in Eq. (22) [45].
i                        1                            2                       3
ai                       1.35e-5                      4e-6                    5e-7
ni                       6                            2                       0.7
mi                       0.8333                       2                       0.4
wi                       0.36                         0.25                    0.39
wi adjusted              0.5                          0.25                    0.25
Ks                       1.15e-9
                       4.003

Table 3. Standard deviations of material properties as listed by Ref. [50].
Property                                             Standard deviation
                                                    1%
cp                                                   5%
                                                    5%
dry                                                 18%
wcap                                                 5%
Kl                                                   1% on Kl, and 1% on log-log scale
