[[PAGE 1]]
This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:

Rahman, Mohammad Mahbubur, Joardder, Mohammad, Khan, Md Imran
Hossen, Pham, Duc Nghia, & Karim, Azharul
(2016)
Multi-scale model of food drying: Current status and challenges.
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 58(5), pp. 858-876.

This file was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/222194/

© Consult author(s) regarding copyright matters

This work is covered by copyright. Unless the document is being made available under a
Creative Commons Licence, you must assume that re-use is limited to personal use and
that permission from the copyright owner must be obtained for all other uses. If the docu-
ment is available under a Creative Commons License (or other specified license) then refer
to the Licence for details of permitted re-use. It is a condition of access that users recog-
nise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. If you believe that
this work infringes copyright please provide details by email to qut.copyright@qut.edu.au

Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Sub-
mitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identified by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appear-
ance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.

https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2016.1227299

[[PAGE 2]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

                       Multi-scale model of food drying: Current status and challenges

   M.M. Rahman1, Mohammad U.H. Joardder1, M.I.H. Khan1,2, Nghia Duc Pham1,3 and M.A.

                                                   Karim1*a

         1
             School of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Science and

        Engineering, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia

   2
       Department of Mechanical Engineering, Dhaka University of Engineering & Technology,

                                          Gazipur-1700, Bangladesh

                3
                    Engineering Faculty, Vietnam National University of Agriculture, Vietnam

   *Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: azharul.karim@qut.edu.au

Abstract

For a long time, food engineers have been trying to describe the physical phenomena that occur

during food processing especially drying. Physics-based theoretical modeling is an important

tool for the food engineers to reduce the hurdles of experimentation. Drying of food is a multi-

physics phenomenon such as coupled heat and mass transfer. Moreover, food structure is multi-

scale in nature, and the microstructural features play a great role in the food processing specially

in drying. Previously simple macroscopic model was used to describe the drying phenomena

which can give a little description about the smaller scale. The multiscale modeling technique

can handle all the phenomena that occur during drying. In this special kind of modeling

approach, the single scale models from bigger to smaller scales are interconnected. With the help

                                                       1
                                                           ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 3]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

of multiscale modeling framework, the transport process associated with drying can be studied

on a smaller scale and the resulting information can be transferred to the bigger scale. This

article is devoted to discussing the state of the art multi-scale modeling, its prospect and

challenges in the field of drying technology. This article has also given some directions to how to

overcome the challenges for successful implementation of multi-scale modeling.

                                                2
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 4]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

   1. Introduction

The Important sources of essential dietary nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, and fiber are

fruits and vegetables. They are considered, as perishable commodities as the moisture content of

them are more than 80% (Paull, 1999). The best way to keep a product fresh is by maintaining its

nutritional value. A common technique for a storage system for perishable items is to maintain

low temperature so as to preserve the nutritional value, but it is difficult to maintain a low

temperature throughout the distribution chain. This contribute to the loss of nutritional value.

This is particularly problematic for post harvesting management of fruits and vegetables in

developing countries where the distribution chain cannot maintain the required low level of

temperatures and thus ruining essential nutritional values of the perishables. An effective answer

to this problem is drying. To promote the food security of over 20% of the world’s perishable

crops, drying is a traditional choice (Sagar & Kumar, 2010). Drying of fruits and vegetables

enhance storage stability, minimize packaging requirements and reduce transport weight and

cost. (M. Rahman, Mustayen, Mekhilef, & Saidur, 2015). The main purpose of drying is to

remove moisture from a material while ensuring the quality of the product. Minimizing

operational cost is also considered in the drying process.

Food is a multi-component system which is a complex integration of different chemical and

physical process. Foods are mainly composed of proteins and carbohydrate polymers that work

as structure builders and the viscosity enricher (Mitchell, 1998). Moreover, there are complex

relations between the macroscopic and the microscopic properties of food materials. The

explanation of this macro-micro property relation cannot be explained using bulk experimental

                                                 3
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 5]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

methods (Limbach & Kremer, 2006). Mathematical modeling can prove its applicability in the

complicated empirical situation (Attig, Binder, Grubmuller, & Kremer, 2004; Baschnagel et al.,

2000). A good mathematical model can help to understand the transport process inside the food

materials during drying. Drying of Porous materials like food is one of the most complex

problems in the engineering field that also has multiscale nature (Mujumdar, 2007). Multiscale

simulation method can serve as an effective approach and can extend the vision of macro-micro

relationship in food drying process. A multiscale modeling technique can establish the relations

between the macroscopic properties with the microstructure of food materials during drying.

The objective of this review is to discuss the application of innovative computational methods

especially multiscale modeling approach in the food drying process. This review will also focus

on the potentiality and the challenges of multiscale modeling technique. The content of this

article proceeds as follows: Firstly, the microstructure of the plant based food materials has been

discussed. After that, the water distribution and the transport process in food materials at

different scales have been discussed. Next, the article will illustrate the modeling approaches that

have been formulated and the limitation of these conventional models. Following that, the

multiscale model with, its basics, current state and the solution technique will be explained. After

that, the interconnection among the sub-models and the challenges will be expounded.

Additionally, several advanced experimental techniques for validating the multiscale model have

been discussed. In the final section, some recommendations have been provided for the further

development of the modeling technique.

                                                 4
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 6]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

   2. Microstructure of plant-based food materials

Plant-based foods are composed of polymers and waters generally. It also contains air and

minerals that are responsible for the complex structure (Gross & Kalra, 2002). The complex

food structure is built as consequences of multiple interactions of polysaccharides and proteins.

Glucose is built by the tissue organization (Street, 1973). Cell structures usually vary widely

range in different samples. Cell walls are formed by the integration of cells. The stabilization of

the cell wall takes place with the help of fibres. Cellulose, pectin and hemicellulose in the plant

cell usually build the cell wall. The water inside the plant cell migrates through the pectin as it is

soluble in water (M. U. Joardder, Kumar, & Karim, 2015).

In the case of drying process, the food material is considered as porous and hygroscopic media

with multiphase transportation of heat and mass transfer inside it (Ni, Datta, & Torrance, 1999).

Fruit tissue, particularly cellular tissue, can be viewed as a summation of parenchyma cells and

intercellular spaces (H. Mebatsion et al., 2006). A thin cell wall composed of cellulose and other

polysaccharides envelops the cell. The porosity of such cell walls is high, and correspondingly

has high permeability to water, so that water retention occurs mainly by surface tension effects.

Inside the cell wall and enclosing the cytoplasm there is also a semi-permeable membrane, called

the plasma lemma (Jose Miguel Aguilera & Stanley, 1999).

Within each cell, the cytoplasm contains a variety of organelles related to the metabolic activity

of the cell, such as the nucleus, mitochondria and others; it is internally bounded by a membrane

known as a tonoplast. Inside the tonoplast there is the vacuole, which has the highest water

content of the cell phases described, reaching levels of about 98%, together with sugars, organic

                                                  5
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 7]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

acids, salts and colloidal materials. The membranes are semi-permeable and when coming in

contact with the vacuolar solution solute concentration, the results in an osmotic effect. The

water chemical potential external to the vacuole generates hydrostatic pressure, which maintains

the protoplast firmly pressed against the cell wall and hence keeps the tissue firm. This means

that loss of water is accompanied by a loss of internal pressure, with the tissue becoming flaccid.

This pressure is known as turgor pressure and plays an important role in the rheology and texture

of the tissue.

Most of the materials including the food materials contain structures of different scales. These

scales are specified by macro-scale, meso scale and micro-scale. For example, when the structure

of an apple is analysed different tissues such as vortex, outer, and inner cortex tissues are found.

These tissues are considered as elements of the structure. This tissue is formed by the integration

of cells that can be observed with the help of a light microscope. Cells have several features i.e.,

membrane, cell wall that is microscopic in magnitude. On the other hand, if the apple is placed in

a dehydration system some physical phenomena can be observed in the centimeter scale which

includes moisture loss. This physical phenomenon is closely linked to the cellular features of

apples. The discussion above shows that, fruits and vegetables are multi-scale materials.

Therefore the drying of food should be explained with the multi scale model for better

understanding (Quang T Ho et al., 2013). A demonstration of different structural arrangements is

presented in Figure 1.

                                                 6
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 8]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

   2.1 Relationship between microstructure and physical property

The drying environment has a great influence on the microstructure. Food structure is

constructed of several materials and their mutual interactions (José Miguel Aguilera & Lillford,

2008). The structure is closely related to the quality of the food materials (Ko & Gunasekaran,

2007; Witek et al., 2010). Drying of food includes modification of microstructures, and this can

be controlled by controlling drying conditions. Novel approaches for drying process mostly rely

on the proper understanding of the architecture and organization of the microstructures.

To design an accurate food processing system, it is imperative to know the structure and the

behaviour of the product. Clear knowledge of the relationships between structure and property of

the food materials are required for developing a better food drying process (Jose M Aguilera,

Stanley, & Baker, 2000). However, the fundamental structure-property relationships are not very

clearly understood till now. As a result, food processing engineers rely on the empirical data for

designing the drying process. Spectacular advances in materials science during the last decade

have emanated from the understanding of the structure of material, its relation to properties (so-

called structure–property relationships), and how to engineer and control those properties.

Material scientists are quite successful in doing this because the microstructures of metals,

ceramics and polymers are more or less homogeneous (Limbach & Kremer, 2006). A large

collection of data on physical properties of foods including thermal, rheological, mechanical and

colour, exist in literature but understanding their relations to microstructure is minimal (M. U.

Joardder et al., 2016a).

                                                7
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 9]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

It is suggested that the microstructural changes during drying of food materials should be

considered as the texture is derived from the microstructure (Bourne, 2002; Mohammad Shafiur

Rahman, 2008). In the case of industrial food processing system, the microstructure of the plant-

based materials is broken. This happens because of the loss of turgor pressure and rapture of the

cellular membranes (Ludikhuyze & Hendrickx, 2001). The microstructure of food martial has an

auditory perception during biting. The sounds that come out during biting of fresh fruits or

vegetable are the instant release of turgor pressure inside the cell (Vickers & Bourne, 1976). In

the case of dried product, this sound comes from the breaking of the cell wall (Duizer, 2001).

Different types of drying have a various effect on the microstructure and the product properties.

The changes in the microstructure that occurs during drying have an effect on the quality of the

food materials (M. U. Joardder, C. Kumar, et al., 2015). The effect of combined hot air drying

with the osmotic pre-treatment was evaluated by (Prothon et al., 2001). The microstructural

studies showed that the quality of the final product was improved for osmotic pre-treatment.

Therefore, a proper understanding of structure-properties relationship will enhance the accuracy

of the perfection models related to food processing.

3. Water transport in different scale drying

In fresh fruits and vegetables, water remains inside the cells and some portion of water stays in

intercellular space. Researchers have found that 85% to 95% water remains inside the cell which

is known as intracellular water (A. Halder, Datta, & Spanswick, 2011). The rest of the water

remains in the intercellular spaces. Mainly three transport mechanisms dominate the internal

moisture transfer. These mechanisms are as follow: (1) transport of bound water, (2) transport of

                                                8
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 10]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

free water and (3) transport of vapour. The flow of the liquid water occurs due to the capillary

forces. The transport of water vapour occurs by the diffusion and the transport of bound water

takes place by desorption and diffusion process (M. U. Joardder, Karim, Kumar, & Brown,

2015).

Water flux inside plant tissue can follow three pathways of transport during drying such as

intercellular, wall to wall and cell to cell. The intercellular transport refers to the water vapour

movement through the intercellular spaces. The wall to wall transport refers to the capillary

water flow through the cell wall tubes. The cell to cell transport refers to water flux through the

vacuoles, the cytoplasm and the cell membranes. In high moisture contents, liquid flows due to

dominating capillary forces. The amount of liquid in the pores decreases with decreasing

moisture content. A gas phase is built up while decreasing the moisture content which causes a

decrease in liquid permeability. Gradually the mass transfer is taken over by vapour diffusion in

a porous structure with increasing vapour diffusion. However, there are different types of mass

transfer mechanisms that dominate at different scales of food materials. Different transport

mechanisms of water in different scale are presented in Table 1.

Water transport during hot air drying leads to porosity evolution. Moreover, shrinkage of the

food material towards the center of the sample compensates for the void volume. Therefore, the

structural deformation phenomenon during heat and mass transfer phenomena is important to

understand for designing the drying process. On the other hand, the process parameter and the

transfer mechanism influence the structural changes and the transfer mechanism (Rastogi,

Raghavarao, Niranjan, & Knorr, 2002; Ziaiifar, Achir, Courtois, Trezzani, & Trystram, 2008).

                                                 9
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 11]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

The pore formation is prevented by the shrinkage. The degree of the structural changes depends

on the distribution of water within the food tissue (Alamar, Vanstreels, Oey, Moltó, & Nicolaï,

2008). Water can be classified on its spatial basis, as intercellular water and intracellular water.

Intracellular water remains inside the cells while the intercellular water remains in the capillaries.

Water in the intercellular space water varies between 78-97% (wet basis) in different fruits and

vegetables. Considering the structure-properties relationship and water migration mechanisms,

there are several ways of prediction of drying kinetics and deformation in the literature. The

following sections describe the existing challenges associated with those models.

   4. Modeling of Drying

For discovering the possible solution to a given problem in food drying, mathematical modeling

is an efficient tool. The classification of mathematical modeling of food drying can be done by

two basic scales. One is macro-scale model, and another is a micro-scale model. The

combination of these two models is named as a multiscale model. Macro-scale models can be

categorized in two approaches such as theoretical model and empirical model. The empirical

models are formulated based on the experimental data, and there is no physics associated with it

(A. Halder et al., 2011). These models are simple and easy to apply for developing drying

kinetics. Theoretical models, on the other hand, are based on physics associated with heat and

mass transfer during drying. Developing physics-based models are challenging tasks. The

complex nature of the agricultural product and the changes in the thermo-physical properties

during drying are the main hurdles to formulate the physics-based models. Moreover, the heat

and mass transfer phenomena are highly coupled in the drying process. The micro-scale model is

                                                 10
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 12]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

a comparatively new approach. It is a very important approach towards multi-scale modeling.

The classifications for the mathematical modeling of food drying have been presented in Figure

2.

4.1 Empirical models for food drying

Empirical models are easier to formulate as the mathematical computation is simple. The output

parameters are measured by the data logging system attached with the experimental setup. A

block diagram for the empirical modeling approach is presented in Figure 3.

Numerous empirical models have been formulated for different food stuffs. The most popular

models are Page, modified Page models, Newtown’s and Lewis models (Erbay & Icier, 2010).

The drying curve of each experiment has been plotted by measuring the moisture content at

different drying time. The basic exponential model is presented as follows

                                  M  Me
                           MR                                                                 (1)
                                  M0  Me

The basic empirical model got wider acceptance among the researchers as these models can

describe the drying behavior but these models failed to describe the complex phenomena of the

drying process. Moreover, these drying models consider moisture content as a function of drying

time and fail to describe the temperature and the moisture distribution in the sample during

drying. It is very crucial to study the moisture content through the food materials for analyzing

micro-organism activity inside it. The micro-organism activity is very important for the food

quality and preservation process. For this reason, a robust mathematical modeling is required that

                                               11
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 13]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

can explain the simultaneous heat and mass transfer phenomena in a variation of moisture

content and temperature.

4.2 Theoretical modeling

Drying is a multi-physics problem where coupled heat and mass transport processes occur inside

the material simultaneously. Therefore, theoretical modeling can provide a realistic

understanding of drying kinetics that can help for optimizing energy efficiency and quality

attributes. Theoretical modeling can be categorised into two types: single phase modeling and

multiphase modeling. There are many single phase models of food drying (Batista, da Rosa, &

Pinto, 2007; Kaya, Aydın, & Dincer, 2008; Kumar, Millar, & Karim, 2015; Paull, 1999; M.

Rahman et al., 2015; Sagar & Kumar, 2010) that have been developed based on the concept of

bulk moisture transport. Diffusion is taken into consideration as the mechanism of the moisture

migration in single phase model. The basic mathematical equations that have been considered for

developing single phase model are shown in Table 2.

Single phase model only considers conduction of energy transport and diffusion for mass

transfer. These models have many significant limitations, for instance, the models have totally

lumped for heat and mass transport and do not include many important physics such as pressure-

driven flow or transport due to physicochemical changes in the porous medium.

In addition, due to the hygroscopic, porous and amorphous nature, plant-based food materials

contain three phases such as solid, liquid water, and gases including water vapour and air

(Curcio, 2010). Therefore, multiphase porous media model for simultaneous heat and mass

transfer can provide a realistic understanding of transport processes. Multiphase model for food

                                              12
                                                   ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 14]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

drying is the model where three phases that (liquid water, gasses and solid) have been considered

for coupled heat and mass transfer. Therefore the development of the physics-based multiphase

model is a challenging task because plant-based food material is non-homogeneous and

hygroscopic in nature. There have been some attempts by the researchers to develop a

multiphase model for different food processing such as frying (B. Farkas, R. Singh, & T.

Rumsey, 1996; A. Halder, A. Dhall, & A. Datta, 2007a; H. Ni & A. Datta, 1999b; A. Warning,

Dhall, Mitrea, & Datta, 2012; R. Yamsaengsung & R. Moreira, 2002), heating (A. Halder &

Datta, 2012; J. Zhang & Datta, 2004), baking (Feyissa, Gernaey, Ashokkumar, & Adler-Nissen,

2011; H. Ni & A. Datta, 1999a; Abdellah Ousegui, C Moresoli, M Dostie, & B Marcos, 2010;

Papasidero, Manenti, & Pierucci, 2015), cooking (Dhall, Halder, & Datta, 2012; Van der Sman,

2013) and drying (Datta, 2007a; Gulati & Datta, 2015; Kumar, Joardder, Karim, Millar, & Amin,

2014; S Mercier, B Marcos, C Moresoli, M Mondor, & S Villeneuve, 2014). The researchers

developed their multiphase model using the basic mathematical equations that are given in Table

3.

Furthermore, different researchers developed multiphase model considering two different

approaches namely, sharp boundary model and distributed evaporation model. These types of

formulation are sometimes called moving boundary, interface tracking or front-tracking problem.

On the other hand, the evaporation that is considered to be distributed throughout the sample

domain is treated as distributed evaporation (A. Halder, Dhall, & Datta, 2010; Kumar C, 2015).

Most of the multiphase model has been developed considering sharp boundary evaporation in

different food processing system, for drying (Curcio, 2010; Khan, Kumar, Joardder, & Karim,

2016; S. Mercier, B. Marcos, C. Moresoli, M. Mondor, & S. Villeneuve, 2014), for frying

                                               13
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 15]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

(Bouchon & Pyle, 2005; Farid & Chen, 1998; B. E. Farkas, R. P. Singh, & T. R. Rumsey, 1996)

and for baking (A. Ousegui, C. Moresoli, M. Dostie, & B. Marcos, 2010). However, the problem

of the sharp-boundary formulation is that it can predict the phase change occurs at the dried

(crust) and moisture material (core) interface only. That is why distributed evaporation model is

necessary which can predict a narrow evaporation zone where rapid evaporation is taking place.

The sharp-boundary model has other limitations such as over prediction of the core temperature

as it ignores any phase change in the core that would act as a heat sink. Since transport of water

vapor toward the core is ignored in a sharp boundary formulation, migration of water vapor from

the interface to the core does not occur during these types of formulations. Sharp boundary

problem formulation also over-predict the vapor flux in the crust region as the pressure

difference between the surface and the interface is never as high as 1 atmosphere (A. Halder, A.

Dhall, & A. K. Datta, 2007).

Moreover, based on the thermal properties, the multiphase model can be categorized as

equilibrium and non-equilibrium formulations. Most of the authors have developed their models

considering equilibrium conditions (Curcio, 2010; S. Mercier et al., 2014; H. Ni & A. K. Datta,

1999; R. Yamsaengsung & R. G. Moreira, 2002). Equilibrium conditions, though have some

problems. Transport will affect the establishment of equilibrium condition and it may be valid

for high moisture content materials. For food processing; one needs to be mindful that

equilibrium condition may never be achieved at the surface since transport is strong there.

Therefore, the non-equilibrium formulation is needed for predicting accurate heat and mass

transfer. Some researcher developed their model by considering non-equilibrium formulation (A.

D. Halder, A. Datta, A. K., 2007; 2012). However, they considered food as a non-hygroscopic

                                               14
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 16]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

porous material and ignored the physics of bound water transport in their model. In practice,

plant-based food materials are hygroscopic in nature, and it contains three types of water that are

discussed below.

The above-mentioned water transport mechanism should be included during developing heat and

mass transfer model for food drying. However, in multiphase models mentioned above have not

considered the bound water transport through these mechanisms during their modeling. As the

multiphase models are considered as a macroscopic model, therefore, it is very difficult to apply

the boundary conditions of cellular level water transport in macroscopic level. This is a major

limitation of existing multiphase model. Though, some researchers have attempted to develop

multiphase model considering bound water transport (A. Halder, A. Dhall, & A. Datta, 2007b; H.

Ni & A. Datta, 1999a), they eventually developed the model for wood drying. (Feng, Tang,

Cavalieri, & Plumb, 2001) Developed a multiphase model considering bound water transport for

porous material. They claimed that the model was developed for food drying. However, they

used the mass conservation equation and the property for wood drying. Major limitations of the

above-discussed models were that they did not consider material shrinkage for migration of

bound water.

Migration of bound water has a significant effect on the material structure. Migration of

intracellular water causes cell shrinkage, pore shrinkage as well as the collapse of cell structure

whereas the movement of cell wall water causes overall tissue shrinkage (Rakesh & Datta,

2011). Therefore, for obtaining micro-level observation of different physics and prediction of

transfer mechanism and deformation macroscale multiphase model is not a proper option.

                                                15
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 17]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Considering the above discussions, multiscale modeling of coupled heat and mass transfer during

drying would be the best approach regarding energy efficiency as well as food quality.

4.3 Challenges in existing modeling technique

The effect of drying conditions on the microstructure of food materials has been neglected for a

long time. For estimating the molecular diffusion and explaining the mass transfer mechanism

Fick’s first and second law are applied without knowing the actual mechanism of the mass

transfer (José Miguel Aguilera, 2005; H. Mebatsion et al., 2006). Nevertheless, developing the

mathematical models and calculating mass transfer rate remains incomplete unless the

microstructure is resolved. The microstructural elements that are below 100  m range critically

participate in transport properties and the physical behaviour of food material (Jose M Aguilera

et al., 2000). Moisture transport through the pores, cell and cell walls of food materials occurs at

this micro-scale. In this respect, microscopic feature is required for modelling to explain the heat

and mass transfer process at this microstructural level. Most of the plant based food materials

encompass parenchyma tissue. The parenchyma tissues are randomly distributed arrays of pores

and cells (Fanta et al., 2012). It has been claimed that the microstructure can be generated with

the help of microscopic image taken by the Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) with proper image

processing algorithm (H. Mebatsion et al., 2006).

Plant-based food materials are assumed to be linearly elastic on the macroscopic scale. Based on

this assumption, the predictive models for food drying have been formulated (J. Zhang, Datta, &

Mukherjee, 2005). The microscopic feature also has a good effect on the macroscopic properties

of the food materials. The geometric properties of the cell, cellular water potential, mechanical

                                                16
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 18]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

properties of the cell wall, the presence of fluid in the cell as well as inter cellular spaces are

good features of microstructural properties (Van Liedekerke et al., 2010). As these features are

useful, microstructural properties should be included for the modeling of the drying of food

materials. The effect of cell geometry on the physical properties of the materials is not

understood comprehensively to date (Juge, 2006; Lee et al., 2004; McCann et al., 2001). Within

this context, the food drying models which have been developed so far face difficulties in

validation process (H. K. Mebatsion, Verboven, Ho, Verlinden, & Nicolaï, 2008). In plant-based

food materials, the variability of components can be found in all scales. As there is a complexity

in the spatial arrangement of the food architecture microstructural geometry of food is required.

In this respect, multiscale modeling of drying of food materials is very important for food drying

technology.

   5. Multiscale modeling technique

For a better understanding of water transport and the mechanical behaviour during drying of food

materials modeling are an effective tool. There are two basic approaches to model the drying

phenomena of food materials. One is macroscopic continuum approach, and another is the

microscopic (cellular) approach. In the first approach, the tissue is considered as homogeneous,

and the modeling is carried out based on the lumped properties of the cell wall and pores

Nguyen, Dresselaers, et al., 200 ;     eraver eke,   er oven,    an Oostveldt, & Nicolaı, 2003 .

The other is micro-scale modelling approach where, the tissue is considered as heterogeneous

and the complex cellular structure is represented by the geometric model. Most of the works

regarding the food materials drying are based on classical continuum approach where the

                                                17
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 19]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

transport properties are considered as a lumped single value throughout the tissue. The tissue of

food materials undergoes large deformations during drying (Karunasena, Gu, Brown, &

Senadeera, 2015). The cell wall deformation occurs as a consequence of turgor pressure

reduction acting on the cell wall. The macroscopic properties and the tissue strength of food

materials are greatly influenced by the cell size and shape, turgor pressure as well as the presence

of intercellular space (Konstankiewicz & Zdunek, 2001). For better understanding of the

influence of drying condition on the tissue the micro-scale model is an effective approach. The

main drawback of the macro-scale model is that, it does not provide the platform to investigate

the microstructural behaviours of the tissue during drying which can be overcome by the micro-

scale modelling. The micro-scale model can describe the deformation of cell wall and the local

distribution of water in cellular level. For predicting, the drying process of entire fruit, the

microscale model can be extended. The extended micro scale can be expressed as multiscale

model. The multiscale model can provide the detail model of microstructural features combining

the continuum type models. The concept of multi-scale modelling addresses some of these

limitations, such as the absence of equilibrium at the microscopic scale or the consideration of

product variability at the industrial scale. The concept of multiscale modelling in drying

technology is presented in Figure 4.

5.1 Present status of multiscale modeling

To establish the relationship between the pore scale mechanism and the macro-scale phenomena

multiscale model can play a key role in drying technology. The multiscale modeling approach is

relatively new in the food engineering sector, and only a few representative publications are

                                                18
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 20]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

available. Some of the significant works related to the multiscale modeling are presented in

Table 4. The table gives an overview of advance modeling approach for mostly related to drying

technology.

Nicoli et al. applied the multi-scale modeling to the post-harvest storage of vegetable and fruits

(Nicolai, Verboven, Scheerlinck, & De Baerdemaeker, 1998). To compute water diffusion co-

efficient in apple skin micro-scale models by (Veraverbeke et al., 2003). For describing the

metabolic gas exchange in pear fruit during post-harvest storage, a multi-scale model was

developed by the researchers (Q Tri Ho, Verboven, Verlinden, & Nicolaï, 2010). The micro-

scale in the intercellular spaces through the cell wall was obtained from the radiation tomography

image. The cellular respiration model was also developed (Quang Tri Ho et al., 2009).

A multi-scale approach to heat and mass transfer in porous media with wood drying was

formulated by Patrick Perre (Perré, 2010). Some simulation of multi-scale transfer configuration

was proposed considering the heterogeneous porous medium. A stack of timber was dried in the

convective dryer. For considering several scales at the same time, homogenization process was

applied. A concept of multi-scale presented is presented in Figure 5.

The principal concern of (Perré, 2010) was the pore morphology, and a couple of computer

codes were formulated to present the modeling works. The computer codes are named as Mesh

pore and Morpho pore. These computer codes were formulated based on the image-based

meshing and the homogenization process. Later a new dual scale model was presented where the

researchers were trying to initiate a new approach to multi-scale modeling without the classical

homogenization complexity (Carr, Turner, & Perre, 2013). However, only 2D analyses were

                                                19
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 21]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

done in these models. Therefore, it is still not clear about the 3D phenomena that occur during

drying. Moreover, the coupled heat and mass transfer phenomena were considered for wood

drying. In the case of food drying, quality is also a very important parameter (Nijhuis et al.,

1998). If this model is applied to the food drying process, the consequences of the fluid transport

and the effect of cell wall properties on the shrinkage phenomena will not be explained well.

A particle-based approach for simulating the micro-level was designed by the researcher

(Karunasena, Senadeera, Brown, & Gu, 2014). The influence of the change of moisture content

on the cell wall and the cell area was investigated in this work. The cell wall was considered as

the non-linear elastic material. Though it is a great approach in this field which gives a lot of

information related to the micro-level drying, it has some limitations. The cell and the tissue

structure of the food materials do not follow a regular shape (Abera et al., 2013). It is really hard

to explain the real phenomena of large deformation of the cell and tissue with approximated

structure. Therefore, a new approach is required to illustrate the real microstructure of food

materials and explain the large deformation in cellular level drying.

When the microscopic scale is much smaller than the macroscopic one, the coupling between

scales is sequential, and the multi-scale approach reduces to a change of scale, also known as

scaling (Defraeye, 2014). On the contrary, when a local thermodynamic equilibrium is not

attained, the scales usually overlap, and two-way coupling is required. This is a real multi-scale

configuration, more demanding both in computational resources and applied mathematics.

Drying has a distinct multi-scale nature on exchange and the transport process at different scale.

One of the strategies for the interconnection is homogenization.

                                                 20
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 22]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

The biophysical activity in a cellular level depends on the gas transportation in the intercellular

territory. For explaining the vapor and the fluid transportation during drying of food materials

modeling is the best way. Some researchers have initiated serially coupled multi-scale model for

avoiding the homogenization process (Esveld, Van Der Sman, Van Dalen, Van Duynhoven, &

Meinders, 2012; Esveld, van der Sman, Witek, et al., 2012). The paradigm can predict the

dynamic moisture diffusion into cellular solid food. The air pores and the air connectivity of the

cell were extracted by X-ray tomographic image and made a discrete microstructure model. A

multi-scale model of the mechanical properties for the food baking process was formulated

(Guessasma, Chaunier, Della Valle, & Lourdin, 2011).

Numerous efforts have been made to model the spatial distribution of gas and the moisture

exchange, but the mathematical models remain incomplete as they did not consider the

microstructure (Putranto & Chen, 2015; A. D. Warning, Arquiza, & Datta, 2015). As a result, a

new model is required for describing the actual phenomena at the cellular level in the case of

food drying.

5.2 Microscale geometrical model

In the microscale model, a different component of cells is distinguished regarding the position,

shape, and orientation. The microscale features of the component such as cell, cell wall and cell

membrane are also studied. The effect of microstructure on transport phenomena in food drying

process has been neglected for a long time while developing the transport models. But the

transport phenomena inside the food materials, physical and biochemical stability greatly depend

on the microstructure. In the case of drying technology, Fick’s first and second laws are used to

                                                21
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 23]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

estimate the rate of mass transfer. The mass transfer investigation remains incomplete unless the

structure is resolved. It is evident that the cell wall can be a controlling factor in the mass transfer

process. Extensive approximation has been made by the food engineers for the solution of the

diffusion equation in a regular geometry. Moreover, the microstructure of food materials is not

regular, and there is no model to investigate the effect of drying process in food microstructure.

A representative volume element is defined as the minimum volume over which the properties of

the material can be calculated. The RVE has been chosen as a non-hygroscopic material where

the solid matrix is considered as the cell surrounded by free water inside it. A schematic diagram

of the RVE is presented in Figure 6.

In practice, plant-based tissue is hygroscopic in nature in which the cells are filled with fluid

commonly known as bound water. Therefore, it is necessary to choose a perfect Representative

Elementary Volume (REV) to develop a model for better prediction. The schematic diagram of

the microstructure of cellular tissue is presented in Figure 7.

The actual microstructural geometry for developing a better model is presented in Figure 8. This

geometry will work as a computational domain which is a compulsory requirement for

developing a model.

5.3 Modelling microstructures of food materials

The microstructural information generated can be used to understand transport mechanisms

during drying and to assess the functionality of finished products. Efforts should be made to

                                                  22
                                                       ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 24]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

derive appropriate scaling laws for results obtained at the microstructural and nano-structural

levels. A variety of microscopic techniques is available for studying different structures and

components of food systems. Building the micro structure of the biological system is the most

complex system in the process of formulating the multi-scale modeling. Despite a great deal of

momentum in cell biology and fruit science, microstructural characterization and computational

modeling of biological systems is still in its infancy. It is not possible to analyze the heat and

mass transfer by means of finite element method due to lack of proper microstructure. Scanning

Electron Microscope (SEM) imaging provides detailed microstructure information at micro scale

resolution without chemical treatment. A suitable image processing technique such as Voronoi

tessellation algorithm can extract the geometrical data and provide a clear idea about the

microstructure. A schematic block diagram of the development microstructure from the

microscopic image is presented in Figure 9.

The transport of water in intercellular spaces and, the cell walls network is predicted by using the

chemical potential as the driving force for water exchange between different microstructural

compartments. The transport property of the water in the cell wall network can be obtained from

the literature.

    6. Numerical Solution for the models

Several advanced numerical methods for the solution of microscale as well as multiscale

modeling have been used. This section will discuss the numerical solution techniques that have

been used for solving the Multi-physics related problem at various scale.

                                                23
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 25]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

   6.1 SPH and DEM method

The key idea in so-called mesh less particle methods is that the material is mass-discretised into

material points. Some researchers have been working on particle-based numerical model to

simulate micromechanics of plant cell (Karunasena, Senadeera, Brown, et al., 2014). Some of

them are concerned with addressing how bulk tissue level mechanics are related to the

micromechanics of cells. They have developed mesh free particle methods to simulate the

mechanics of both individual plant cells and its response to the external stress. At the same time,

there has been a significant concern on modeling the mechanical behavior of tissue. The model

considered the cell fluid and the cell wall as the two main features of a plant cell. For developing

the cell fluid model, Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) has been used. On the other hand,

Discrete Element Method (DEM) has been used to model the cell wall. In this model, the

researcher has tried to address how biological cell responds to mechanical load. A two-

dimensional single cell model that is capable of predicting cellular level shrinkage as a function

of moisture content has been developed. The researchers claimed that the mesh free nature of the

model gives it the capability to handle large deformations and multiphase interactions and

subcellular details which are the key concern in multiscale modeling approach (Karunasena,

Senadeera, Brown, et al., 2014).

6.2 Finite element method

For solving the partial differential equation, finite element method (FEM) is a flexible and

widely used method (Zienkiewicz & Taylor, 2005). In FEM method the computational domain is

subdivided into a number of elements having different shape and size. Every element in the

                                                24
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 26]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

computational domain are interconnected in a certain number of nodal points. An unknown

solution is assigned to every element. This unknown solution is known as shape function. In the

following step, the governing equations are discretised using suitable meshing technique. The

governing equation is normalized with this meshing technique. Depending on the time variable

the system equations are defined whether it will be ordinary differential equation function or

algebraic equations. After that, these equations are solved by the finite difference approximation

approach. The details of finite element method can be found in many literatures (Bathe, 2008;

Efendiev & Hou, 2009).

6.3 Lattice Boltzmann method

To simulate of the microscale and the meso-scale model the lattice Boltzmann method and the

molecular dynamics methods are also useful. Lattice Boltzmann method is different from the

traditional approaches (Van der Sman, 2007). Materials and the fluids are represented as quasi-

particle in the lattice Boltzmann method. These particles maintain the basic conservation law of

energy, momentum, and mass while interacting via collision. The rules of the collisions maintain

the discretised Boltzmann equation. The discretization of momentum, space and time make

Lattice Boltzmann different from the other methods.

6.4 Molecular dynamics

In the molecular dynamics method, the momentum of the molecules is computed with the

solution of the Newton’s equation of motions (Van der Sman, 2007). The van der Waals, the

covalent bond and the electrostatic interaction creates a potential field. The created potential field

is used to compute the forces between the molecules. The evaluation of these potentials is

                                                 25
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 27]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

computationally the most intensive step of a molecular dynamics simulation. Molecular

dynamics can be considered as a discrete element method. This method is not used frequently in

food processing engineering (Limbach & Kremer, 2006). Especially in drying technology this

methodology has not been used yet.

6.5 Bridging between the scales

A multiscale model is a hierarchy of some sub-models that describes the process phenomena at

different spatial scale (Aregawi, Abera, Fanta, Verboven, & Nicolai, 2014). The main challenge

of formulating the multiscale model is to establish a logical relation between the scales (Perré &

Rémond, 2006; Perré, Rémond, Colin, Mougel, & Almeida, 2012). Drying of food materials is a

multiscale phenomenon and at a better approach to formulating the drying model is the

multiscale model (Quang T Ho et al., 2013). For bridging the macro-scale and the microscale

models, an effective approach was proposed which is known as ―homogenization‖. It is a

powerful mathematical tool, and the macroscopic properties can be predicted from the

microscopic description by using this tool. The homogenization process includes a couple of

second order diffusion equations. These equations are known as the governing equation. The

apparent diffusion can be calculated by solving the cellular diffusion equation.       A sample

homogenization approach is presented in Figure 10. (Q Tri Ho et al., 2010).

Recently, Van Der Sman et al. (2012) have developed a multiscale model with serial coupling

technique (Esveld, Van Der Sman, Van Dalen, et al., 2012; Esveld, van der Sman, Witek, et al.,

2012). The model can predict the dynamics of the moisture diffusion of food materials in cellular

level. To develop the model the researcher used the X-ray micro tomography image to get the

                                               26
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 28]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

information about the cellular network and the pores. The model considers the local diffusivity

through the moisture sorption and the pores. These parameters were incorporated into the macro-

scale model for predicting the dynamic moisture profile of crackers.

Although researchers have always shown more interest in the macroscopic scale, the microscopic

transport phenomenon is also an important factor in drying technology (José Miguel Aguilera,

2005; Fanta et al., 2014). For simulation of the drying process, numerous mathematical equations

have been proposed by (Whitaker, 1977, 1998). Later some researchers have made some changes

in these equations and assumption and proposed some new models (H. Ni & A. Datta, 1999a).

Some of the researchers have considered internal over pressure and the bound water diffusion

(Hills & Remigereau, 1997). Some researchers have considered the evolution of the porosity in

their model (Datta, 2007a; Ni et al., 1999). Usually, the microscale model is formulated to

calculate the apparent properties of the sample more accurately. The Heterogeneous Multiscale

Method (HMM) can be a suitable option for coupling both the scales as the as the constitutive

relation relies on many variables (E et al., 2007). The HMM can be initialised by discretization

of macro-scale equations. A finite element method is an efficient option in this regard. The

framework for the heterogeneous multiscale modeling is presented in Figure 10.

The general framework is as follows. If a microscopic system is given, the state variable of

which is denoted by u, and can be written as Equation 2,

                                          f u, b  0                                       (2)

                                               27
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 29]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Where b is the set of auxiliary conditions, such as initial and boundary conditions for the

problem. Here, the microscopic details of u are not interest rather macroscopic state of the

system which is represented by U that satisfies the following macroscopic equation:

                                                      FU , D  0

                                                                                                  (3)

Where D represents the macroscopic data that are necessary for the model to be completed.

Considering the compression operator Q that maps u and U, and R any operator that reconstructs

u from U we can find that,

                             Qu  U                        RU  u                                 (4)

Where, compression and reconstruction operators are similar to the projection and prolongation

operators used in Multi-grid methods. The goal of HMM is to compute U using the abstract form

of F and the microscopic model. It consists of two main components; one is selection of a

macroscopic solver another is estimating the missing macro-scale data D using the microscale

model.

The microscale model can be used to compute the deformation and the dehydration of tissue of

plant-based food materials during drying. The apparent properties of the food materials can be

calculated from the cellular properties. For example, the apparent diffusion coefficient can be

determined from the apparent water conductivity by following equation (Aregawi et al.,2014)

                                                    Kapp
                                           Dapp                                                  (5)
                                                    mcw

                                                28
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 30]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Where, cw is the water capacity of the cell, m is the density of the cell

Similarly. The apparent water conductivity is calculated from the following relationship

(Aregawi et al.,2014)

                                                                          h
                                                             Kapp  J                              (6)
                                                                         

Where, J is the total flux of the fruit tissue (kg m-2s-1),  is the water potential difference in the

two side of the cell wall (Pa).

The apparent deformation, which is known as shrinkage of the food materials can be calculated

by assuming the change in displacement in the tissue due to a change in turgor pressure. The

turgor pressure generates stress that leads to expansion of the cell wall of the plant based food

materials. Therefore, the turgor loss can be responsible for the shrinkage phenomena

   7. Required properties for the multiscale model

Material properties are the most important part of theoretical modeling. It is required for all the

relevant physics for realistic prediction of drying mechanism. The food drying related properties

are rheological, mechanical, thermal, mass transport and electrical properties. Food materials

undergo changes in moisture, temperature, and structure. Major changes in structure can easily

be seen by naked eye. The changes in structure mostly depend on the variation in temperature

and moisture. It also varies in different products. So properties of the food materials are required

to be known for a better modeling approach. Nevertheless, some properties of food materials are

not available in the literature; especially, the cell-level properties of food materials are very rare.

                                                  29
                                                       ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 31]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Modeling can contribute to the process design in a significant way, and it can start with the

limited available data. If there is no available data in the literature, modeling can start with

approximate data with simplified correlation as a starting point. After that, the sensitivity

analysis on the unavailable data needs to be completed. Some of the properties are discussed in

the following sections.

7.1 Cell shrinkage

Modeling of shrinkage during drying of plant-based food material is an important task. From the

mechanical point of view, cells can be considered as closed thin cell wall structure. To model the

shrinkage mechanism, Newton’s second law was considered y researchers. The following set of

equations were solved for the position of the vertices and the velocity of cell wall during drying

                                                dvi
                                           mi        FT ,i                                     (7)
                                                dt

                                            dxi
                                                 vi                                            (8)
                                            dt

Where m is the mass of the vertex (Kg) of the cellular tissue. To simplify the model, the rate of

change of the vertices is considered as equal to the net force acting on the vertex.

The cell wall tension is maintained by the turgor pressure and the cell shrinkage is the result of

the loss of turgor pressure on the cell wall. The walls of a cell and the adjacent cell walls have

been modelled as parallel elements. The cell walls are also considered as non-linear elastic

materials. Neo-Hookean elastic model can be used for modeling the cell wall. The total force

acting on a cell can be expressed using the following formula

                                                  30
                                                       ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 32]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

                                      FT  Fw  Fd                                             (9)

The force Fw is the resultant of the net turgor pressure. Fd Is the damping force and it is a

product of damping factor and vertex velocity.The details of cell shrinkage can be found in

(Fanta et al, 2012).

7.2 Cell mechanics

Linear elasticity can describe the small deformation. The mechanical equilibrium without

external force can be expressed by the following equation

                                                   
                                        D  e  0                                       (10)

Where D is the stiffness matrix of linear elastic model (Pa) and  e is the elastic strain

The shrinkage strain and the mechanical strain formulate the total strain

                                             e  d                                        (11)

Where,  d is the shrinkage strain

As food materials undergo large deformation during drying, it is not possible to quantify the

mechanical behavior with the linear elastic model. The nonlinear characteristics of food

materials can be explained by the nonlinear elastic model. The stress inside the tissue can be

calculated from the following mechanical equilibrium, ignoring any surface and body forces.

                                              
                                             S  F T  0                                   (12)

                                                     31
                                                          ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 33]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Where,     FT is the transpose of the deformation gradient tensor and S is the second Piola-

kirchhoff stress tensor. Equation (12) can be used for building the relationship between shrinkage

strain and elastic strain.

The nominal stress can be expressed as follows

                                                W
                                           p                                                (13)
                                                λ

Where W is the strain energy density function, and λ is the Stretch ration.

The Neo-Hookean model for the strain energy density function is as follows:

                                 W  I   A10  I1  λ1                                    (14)

Where, I1 is the invariant of the coordinate system, A10 is the co-efficient of the energy density

function, and λ1 is the Lames constant also known as stretch ratio.

Lame’s constant (λ1 , λ 2 )

                                          λ1 = λ, λ2  λ                                     (15)

                                          I1  λ12  λ22                                     (16)

Therefore,

The nominal stress according to Neo-Hookean model,

                                                  32
                                                       ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 34]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

                                                  1
                                   p  2 A10  λ  2                                         (17)
                                              λ 

The value of A10 can be found from the nominal stress-strain by curve fitting method.

7.3 Cell diffusivity

Cell level diffusivity is an important parameter while considering the cellular level drying. Water

diffusion through cell wall can be expressed y Fick’s first law considering water moves as a

result of pressure gradient (Nguyen, Verboven, Scheerlinck, Vandewalle, & Nicolaï, 2006;

Nobel, 1999). It can be expressed as follows

                                  j  k                                                    (18)

Where j is the water flux (kg m-2 s-1),  is the pressure (Pa),  is the gradient operator and K

is water conductivity. The relationship between bulk diffusivity and the water conductivity of

the cell wall can e derived y Fick’s second law of diffusion, as shown below:

                                  d
                          dmC       K                                                  (19)
                                  dt

Where, dm is the density of the dry matter in cell (kg m-3), C water capacity of the cell (kg

kg-1 pa-1) and t is the time (s). The values of water capacity can be found from the sorption

isotherm curve. By using constant isotherm properties, diffusivity of the cell can be derived by

the following relationship:

                                     K
                              D                                                              (20)
                                   dmC

                                                 33
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 35]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Where, D is the cell diffusivity.

The researchers have considered the mass balance equations for modeling the natural

dehydration of plant-based food materials as these processes are mainly dominated by the mass

transfer process. Therefore, heat transfer process is generally ignored in these models. However,

drying process involves heat transfer along with the mass transfer process. Therefore, the heat

and mass balance must be coupled during modeling the food drying process (Perré, 2015).

Multiscale modeling is a comparatively new approach in the drying technology. In the modeling

of microscale drying process, no researchers have considered the coupled heat and mass transfer

process. The future researchers can focus in this area.

7.4 Capillary diffusivity

Capillary diffusivity is caused due to moisture gradient and temperature gradient. When the

material is wet, the effective diffusivity is close to the capillary diffusivity (Datta, 2007b). The

relationship between moisture content and the capillary diffusivity in potato is given as follows

                            Dw  1.0 108 exp  2.8  2.0M                                  (21)

Where, Dw is the capillary diffusivity and M is the moisture content of the materials.

7.5 Porosity

Porosity in food material is known as the volume fraction of air space or void space inside the

tissue. It depends on the moisture content and the drying condition (Madiouli, Sghaier, Lecomte,

& Sammouda, 2012). The void space is termed as pores, and it can be divided into three groups

                                                 34
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 36]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

such as open pores, closed pores, and blind pores. In the open pores, the flow of fluid typically

takes place. The blind pores have one close end, and the closed pores are closed from all sides

(Datta, 2007b). Porosity in non-hygroscopic materials is not variable with the moisture content.

On the other hand, porosity in hygroscopic materials increases with the reduction of moisture

content (Marousis & Saravacos, 1990). The gas phase is present in open and closed pores. The

open pores are interconnected with the external surface of the materials. The measurement of the

porosity can be calculated from the values of theoretical and practical data by measuring the bulk

density and the particle density.

For plant-based tissue, porosity exists at their initial condition, and that type of porosity is

identified as initial porosity. For example, the initial porosity of apple tissue is around 0.25-0.3

depending on varieties (M. Joardder, Brown, Kumar, & Karim). Porosity can be measured

experimentally in many ways, and interested readers can be referred to the works of Joardder et

al (2015) for more details. On the other hand, there are many empirical and theoretical model of

porosity prediction (Krokida, Zogzas, & Maroulis, 1997; M. S. Rahman, 2001; Ross,

Campanella, & Okos, 2002) available in the literature. One of the suitable models of porosity can

be used in the heat and mass transfer equation of the multiscale modeling to represent porosity.

8. Model validation

For validating the multiscale modeling approach detailed experimental data is required. The

drying of food material is a complex multi-physics and multiscale problem. The complexity

occurs because of the non-uniformity, anisotropicity and the heterogeneity of the food materials.

It needs modern experimental techniques and the development of new drying equipment for

                                                35
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 37]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

monitoring active drying phenomena. A schematic diagram of the modern laboratory drying

equipment is presented in Figure 12.

Experimental techniques based on non-destructive imaging show promising perspectives for

detailed validation of numerical models. Most popular ones are presented in Table 5 together

with a few applications.

A more in-depth discussion can be found in the literature (Perré, 2011). There is a strong relation

between the attainable spatial resolution in the image and the image acquisition time, which both

depend on the used techniques and the types of devices used e.g. laboratory, synchrotron or

clinical X-ray. The high spatial resolution of some techniques allows studying transport

processes down to the micro scale level.

8.1 Microscopic imaging

For obtaining the spatial fields, several microscopic imaging devices are usually used such as

scanning electron microscope, transmission electron microscope, optical microscope, confocal

microscope, CCD cameras. A small change in the imaging environment can be made during or

before imaging to increase the focus on specific information Paredes, Martınez-Alonso, &

Tascón, 2003). Various cellular level properties of the food materials such cell density, moisture

content, rheological behaviour, chemical composition can be obtained depending on the method.

By combining several images of different angle multi-dimensional, information can be obtained

(Garini, Vermolen, & Young, 2005). All of these data are important to understanding the

mechanism of food drying in cellular level.

                                                36
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 38]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Scanning electron microscope, atomic force microscope and scanning tunnel microscope are the

popular device that produces two dimensional images by scanning sample. The scanning process

is very slow therefore these techniques are only used when high resolution information as an

example up to 1 micrometre is needed (Centonze & Pawley, 2006). Optical microscope, Coupled

Charge device (CCD) cameras, Infrared (IR) cameras provide high resolution images in a non-

invasive way. IR cameras are suitable for obtaining the temperature profile of the sample

(Maldague, 2002). Another modern microscope is a confocal microscope. The spatial resolution

is higher than the other types of microscope. The confocal microscope also provides three-

dimensional profile of the sample (Cha, Lin, Zhu, Sun, & Fainman, 2000). This technique is

highly suitable for getting fresh cell images. The details mechanism and the measuring technique

of these devices cannot be provided here because of space limitation. The readers are referred to

the literature for details (José Miguel Aguilera, 2005; Perré, 2011).

8.2 X-Ray Tomography

Classical X-ray tomography is based on the attenuation of an X-ray beam by matter which is a

coupled effect of photon energy, atomic number, and linear density. An X-ray attenuation system

basically consists of a source and a detector. In conventional X-ray tubes, an electron beam,

accelerated by a high voltage, collides with a metal target which is known as an anode and

produce X-ray photons. In synchrotron facilities, the X-ray beam is produced by the deviation of

a high-energy electron beam by intense magnetic fields perpendicular to the beam direction

(Falcone et al., 2004). Synchrotron X-ray beams have high brilliance, a high level of

polarization, and small angular divergence. Punctual, 1-D, and 2-D sensors have proportional

                                                37
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 39]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

counters, solid-state detectors, or scintillator coupled to a CCD camera. All these detectors can

form 2-D attenuation images of an object, directly or by scanning over one or two spatial

dimensions. Three-dimensional description of the object is obtained by computed tomography

(CT). A suitable algorithm is used to compute in 3-D (voxels) the radio density values, also

called the CT-numbers, from several 2-D projections, grabbed at different rotation angles of the

sample (materials science) or of the tube detector set (medical application and materials science).

CT scanning was invented independently in the 1970s by Hounsfield and Cormack, who shared

the Nobel Prize for medicine in 1979 (Perré, 2011).

Although the first application of computed tomography was primarily in medicine, it rapidly

became a very useful tool in physics, materials science and engineering (Wood, Zerhouni,

Hoford, Hoffman, & Mitzner, 1995). The initial device has undergone substantial improvement

both from technical and computational points of view. Nowadays, the typical resolution of a

medical scanner is below one millimeter. This relative accuracy is excellent for imaging objects

with a diameter of up to half a meter (Perré & Huber, 2007). However, this resolution is

unsuitable for studying porous media. During the last two decades, micro-tomography, based on

micro-focus X-ray sources, has become a relatively common tool in materials science (Limodin

et al., 2011).

Today, the commercially available desktop equipment allows non-destructive 3-D reconstruction

at a spatial resolution of a few mm. A laboratory Nano-CT scanner, which uses an open-type X-

ray tube with sub-micrometric spatial resolution, has even been heralded recently. However, in

the domain of micro-tomography, the specifications proposed by synchrotron radiation facilities,

                                                38
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 40]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

which produce monochromatic X-ray beams of high intensity, remain incomparable. At the

European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), at least two beam lines propose tomography

(Baruchel et al., 2006). These two beam lines are ID 19 and ID 15. As the main disadvantage of

micro-tomography is its acquisition time, it is worth noting that beam line ID 15 provides a full

3-D data set in less than one second with a spatial resolution. It is also important to mention

phase imaging, which allows a much better contrast for light materials such as polymers or

cellular plant tissues.

8.3 Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)

For determining the portion of water in living cells nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is an

efficient tool. The physical and chemical environment inside the material affects the relaxation

time and the NMR spectra. The details of water in the heterogeneous system can be obtained by

NMR (Chatakanonda, Dickinson, & Chinachoti, 2003; Li, Dickinson, & Chinachoti, 1998). The

relaxation time of NMR gives useful information regarding the changes in water during food

processing.

It has been reported that for the same moisture water is less mobile in gluten than in starch (Li,

Dickinson, & Chinachoti, 1996). The NMR technique has used in determining the water activity

in meat. The relaxation time for meat shows multiple exponential decays which means there are

different types of water inside the cell (Bertram, Dønstrup, Karlsson, & Andersen, 2002). The

researchers have termed the types of water as bound water and strongly bound water in cells

(Bodurka, Buntkowsky, Olechnowicz, Gutsze, & Limbach, 1996; Konishi, Kobayashi, & Miura,

2010; Miedziejko, Plenzler, NAPIERAŁA, & NAROŻNA, 199 ; Yoshikawa & Ohsaka, 1979 .

                                               39
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 41]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

These two types of water contain different dynamic behavior. For the cheese drying the moisture,

profile was determined by the NMR with mass transfer modeling. The proposed model showed

good results for both moisture profile and the drying curve (Chen, Wei, & Zhang, 2010).

8.4 NIR Spectroscopy

Near Infrared Reflectance (NIR) spectroscopy operates based on absorption of electromagnetic

radiation. NIR spectra of foods comprise combinations of vibrational modes involving numerous

chemical bonds (Huang, Yu, Xu, & Ying, 2008). Due to the sensitivity of absorbance in this

technology the particle size, chemical state, and moisture content can be tracked effectively. This

makes measurements in organic and biological systems feasible using NIR spectroscopy. The

schematic diagram of NIR spectroscopy is shown in Figure 13. The radiation may be absorbed,

transmitted, or reflected when interacting with samples. Therefore, there are different NIR

spectroscopy measurement modes for different applications. NIR spectroscopy is a fast, non-

destructive analytical technique and is becoming one of the most promising for online product

evaluation (Gou et al., 2013; Stawczyk, Munoz, Collell, & Comaposada, 2009).

NIR spectroscopy is one of the most efficient tools for control and monitoring of food processing

system (Huang et al., 2008). The quality of the food products can also be measured by NIR

spectroscopy. Continuous development of NIR spectroscopy has made it one of the most robust

technologies (Demers, Gosselin, Simard, & Abatzoglou, 2012). During the drying process, this

technology can be used to measure the moisture content of the product with the sensitive probes.

This approach will be an effective approach for analyzing the active drying phenomena. NIR

spectroscopy was used for determining the water activity of sausage during drying (Stawczyk et

                                                40
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 42]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

al., 2009). The output of the research was impressive, and it proved that NIR spectroscopy is a

fast method to control and monitor the drying process. For analyzing the control and monitoring

of the microwave drying of Apple thermography assisted NIR spectroscopy was also used

(Cuccurullo, Giordano, Albanese, Cinquanta, & Di Matteo, 2012). This system allows an

efficient temperature control by detecting the maximum temperature inside the sample.

       9. Challenges in Multiscale modeling

Though multiscale modeling has a great potential in explaining the phenomena during drying, it

has not been used much in drying technology field Strumiłło, 200 . There are some challenges

in implementing the multiscale model. Coupling of the sub-models that describes the related

physics in each scale is one of the most important challenges. Specially, building bidirectional

relationship between microscale and microscale is a challenge (Perré, 2007). In most of the

cases, the coupling has been performed using numerical experiments. For reflecting the actual

phenomena boundary condition plays a great role (Nassehi & Parvazinia, 2011). So far dirichlet

boundary conditions have been used for this purpose. Researchers have shown that periodic

boundary condition exhibit a better result (Yue & Weinan, 2007). On the other hand,

Conventional multiscale simulation methods mostly rely on the homogenization process

(Pavliotis & Stuart, 2008). The homogenization process separates the scale in term of time and

lengths. The size of the representative elementary volume can be a great challenge for

establishing the serial coupling (Ingram, Cameron, & Hangos, 2004). Therefore, the

representative elementary volume needs to be defined carefully.

                                              41
                                                   ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 43]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

The computational domain is an important part of the modeling purpose. An accurate

representative elementary volume can represent a better platform for the computation (Quang Tri

Ho et al., 2011). There is structural heterogeneity in the microstructure of the food materials. As

an example Apple parenchyma cells have a great variation in their size and shape. Therefore, the

statistical technique can be used to build the microstructure of the food materials. Moreover,

structural heterogeneity consideration is a great challenge in simulating the multiscale model.

Researchers have recommended for the finite-element method for the propagation of these

random variations (Quang T Ho et al., 2013).

Prediction of the food properties is also a big issue in multiscale modeling. During the drying

process the phase transition like boiling or freezing manipulates the material properties. A

description of this process is required to simulate the evolution of the phase in microscale (Van

der Sman & Van Der Goot, 2009). Recently, researchers have given some description regarding

the phase transition during the drying process (Curcio, 2010; Dhall, Squier, et al., 2012; Kumar,

Joardder, Farrell, Millar, & Karim, 2014; Kumar et al., 2015; J. Zhang & Datta, 2004). These

models are known as multiphase models. The evolution of the microstructure can be presented in

multiscale with the help of the multiphase models. Another important factor that can hamper in

the path of multiscale modeling is the cell level material properties (M. U. Joardder, Karim,

Kumar, & Brown, 2016b). Though, we have a lot of material properties at room temperature, the

properties during active drying is still unavailable (Gharsallaoui, Roudaut, Chambin, Voilley, &

Saurel, 2007; Mayor & Sereno, 2004; Scheerlinck et al., 2000; Wang & Brennan, 1995). It needs

a good number of experiments and a good experimental set up to find out the materials properties

                                                42
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 44]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

during the active drying process. Lack of proper experimental set up can be a great difficulty to

validate the models in active drying condition.

Modeling and numerical simulation of drying of a lot of food materials are much more

complicated than modeling and simulation of single food material drying. It needs higher

computational cost (Fletcher et al., 2006). Knowledge about multi-phase flow in porous media

with phase change phenomena is needed for modeling of drying of food materials (Datta, 2007a).

Also, the interaction between particles as well as liquid and gas flows in porous media must be

taken into account in the modeling of drying of food materials (Karunasena, Senadeera, Gu, &

Brown, 2014). Moreover, the information about the structure and properties of food particles as

well as the phenomena occurring at pore scale is needed to provide for better interpretations of

food behaviours during drying (José Miguel Aguilera, Chiralt, & Fito, 2003). Because of these

complexities, the modeling of the drying process of food materials in a dryer is still challenging.

One of the major difficulties related to explaining the water transport phenomena in the

intercellular territory. This causes inaccuracy in designing and the validation of the mathematical

model and low efficiency of the whole process. A multi-scale model is required to capture all of

these intra-particle gradients to describe the processes more accurately.

   10. Suggestions for future research

The future of the multiscale modeling approach in food drying sector is promising. It is not

expected that the multiscale modeling approach will replace the laboratory or the full-scale

testing. The multiscale modeling approach can be very helpful in optimizing the food drying

process.

                                                  43
                                                       ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 45]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Some studies are found in the field of horticulture and osmotic dehydration that considered only

the mass transfer phenomena in a different scale (Aregawi et al 2013, Fanta et al 2014).

However, no work has been done in drying area. There is a big research gap in formulating the

multiscale model in the field of food drying process where coupled heat and mass transfer should

be considered. Moreover, shrinkage is also an important factor during drying. For considering

the shrinkage phenomena, it is recommended that the cell mechanics model should the integrated

with the heat and mass transfer process. Multiphysics modeling approach and the CFD analysis

can be very helpful to develop the multiscale drying model.

The successful implementation of multiscale model will facilitate the energy smart drying

process. The required energy to dry the food materials can be easily identified with multiscale

modeling technique. Determination of energy required in microscale and macroscale during

drying has also a great research prospect in multiscale modelling technique.

   11. Conclusions

Multiscale modelling is a new approach in the field of drying technology. In this article, an

overview of multiscale modelling in drying technology has been presented. Food materials are

considered as porous hygroscopic materials. Therefore, drying of food materials are considered

as multiphase and multiscale phenomena. Advanced modelling and simulation techniques are

needed to build a multiscale food drying model. One of the most important challenges in

formulating multiscale modelling is the cellular level dynamic material property. Another big

challenge associated with the multiscale model is its validation. A better experimental set up is

required to validate at developed multiscale model. In the other fields, especially in materials

                                               44
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 46]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

science field, multiscale model has become the mainstream methodology for customizing the

process design. The prospect of multiscale model in food drying technology is also highly

promising. The multiscale model will be very useful in optimizing the use of current dryer as

well as the drying process. It can be a path-way to an environment friendly and energy efficient

drying technology. Though multiscale modelling is an emerging modelling technique in the field

of food drying technology, its progress can be delayed for the lack of understanding of the

physics of food at microscale. Therefore, it is recommended that a detailed research should be

continuing in the microscale level and food microstructure.

Acknowledgement

The first author acknowledges the support from the Queensland University of Technology post

graduate Research Award (QUTPRA) to carry out this research.

                                               45
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 47]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

References

Abera, M. K., Fanta, S. W., Verboven, P., Ho, Q. T., Carmeliet, J., & Nicolai, B. M. (2013).

       Virtual fruit tissue generation based on cell growth modelling. Food and Bioprocess

       Technology, 6(4), 859-869.

Aguilera, J. M. (2005). Why food microstructure? Journal of Food Engineering, 67(1), 3-11.

Aguilera, J. M., Chiralt, A., & Fito, P. (2003). Food dehydration and product structure. Trends in

       Food Science & Technology, 14(10), 432-437. doi:10.1016/s0924-2244(03)00122-5

Aguilera, J. M., & Lillford, P. J. (2008). Structure–property relationships in foods Food

       Materials Science (pp. 229-253): Springer.

Aguilera, J. M., & Stanley, D. W. (1999). Microstructural principles of food processing and

       engineering: Springer Science & Business Media.

Aguilera, J. M., Stanley, D. W., & Baker, K. W. (2000). New dimensions in microstructure of

       food products. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 11(1), 3-9.

Alamar, M., Vanstreels, E., Oey, M., Moltó, E., & Nicolaï, B. (2008). Micromechanical

       behaviour of apple tissue in tensile and compression tests: Storage conditions and cultivar

       effect. Journal of Food Engineering, 86(3), 324-333.

Aregawi, W. A., Abera, M. K., Fanta, S. W., Verboven, P., & Nicolai, B. (2014). Prediction of

       water loss and viscoelastic deformation of apple tissue using a multiscale model. Journal

       of Physics: Condensed Matter, 26(46), 464111.

                                                46
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 48]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Attig, N., Binder, K., Grubmuller, H., & Kremer, K. (2004). Computational soft matter: from

       synthetic polymers to proteins. John von Neumann Institute for Computing (NIC),

       Juelich.

Baruchel, J., Buffiere, J.-Y., Cloetens, P., Di Michiel, M., Ferrie, E., Ludwig, W., . . . Salvo, L.

       (2006). Advances in synchrotron radiation microtomography. Scripta Materialia, 55(1),

       41-46.

Baschnagel, J., Binder, K., Doruker, P., Gusev, A. A., Hahn, O., Kremer, K., . . . Paul, W.

       (2000). Bridging the gap between atomistic and coarse-grained models of polymers:

       status and perspectives Viscoelasticity, atomistic models, statistical chemistry (pp. 41-

       156): Springer.

Bathe, K. J. (2008). Finite element method: Wiley Online Library.

Batista, L. M., da Rosa, C. A., & Pinto, L. A. (2007). Diffusive model with variable effective

       diffusivity considering shrinkage in thin layer drying of chitosan. Journal of Food

       Engineering, 81(1), 127-132.

Bertram, H. C., Dønstrup, S., Karlsson, A. H., & Andersen, H. J. (2002). Continuous distribution

       analysis of T 2 relaxation in meat—an approach in the determination of water-holding

       capacity. Meat science, 60(3), 279-285.

Bodurka, J., Buntkowsky, G., Olechnowicz, R., Gutsze, A., & Limbach, H.-H. (1996).

       Investigation of water in normal and dehydrated rabbit lenses by 1 H NMR and

                                                  47
                                                       ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 49]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

       calorimetric measurements. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering

       Aspects, 115, 55-62.

Bouchon, P., & Pyle, D. L. (2005). Modelling Oil Absorption During Post-Frying Cooling: I:

       Model Development. Food and Bioproducts Processing, 83(4), 253-260.

       doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1205/fbp.05115

Bourne, M. (2002). Food texture and viscosity: concept and measurement: Academic press.

Carr, E. J., Turner, I., & Perre, P. (2013). A dual-scale modeling approach for drying

       hygroscopic porous media. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation, 11(1), 362-384.

Centonze, V., & Pawley, J. B. (2006). Tutorial on practical confocal microscopy and use of the

       confocal test specimen Handbook of biological confocal microscopy (pp. 627-649):

       Springer.

Cha, S., Lin, P. C., Zhu, L., Sun, P.-C., & Fainman, Y. (2000). Nontranslational three-

       dimensional profilometry by chromatic confocal microscopy with dynamically

       configurable micromirror scanning. Applied Optics, 39(16), 2605-2613.

Chatakanonda, P., Dickinson, L. C., & Chinachoti, P. (2003). Mobility and distribution of water

       in cassava and potato starches by 1H and 2H NMR. Journal of agricultural and food

       chemistry, 51(25), 7445-7449.

Chen, F. L., Wei, Y. M., & Zhang, B. (2010). Characterization of water state and distribution in

       textured soybean protein using DSC and NMR. Journal of Food Engineering, 100(3),

       522-526.

                                                 48
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 50]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Cuccurullo, G., Giordano, L., Albanese, D., Cinquanta, L., & Di Matteo, M. (2012). Infrared

       thermography assisted control for apples microwave drying. Journal of Food

       Engineering, 112(4), 319-325.

Curcio, S. (2010). A multiphase model to analyze transport phenomena in food drying processes.

       Drying Technology, 28(6), 773-785.

Datta, A. (2007a). Porous media approaches to studying simultaneous heat and mass transfer in

       food processes. I: Problem formulations. Journal of Food Engineering, 80(1), 80-95.

Datta, A. (2007b). Porous media approaches to studying simultaneous heat and mass transfer in

       food processes. II: Property data and representative results. Journal of Food Engineering,

       80(1), 96-110.

Defraeye, T. (2014). Advanced computational modelling for drying processes–A review. Applied

       Energy, 131, 323-344.

Demers, A. M., Gosselin, R., Simard, J. S., & Abatzoglou, N. (2012). In‐line near infrared

       spectroscopy monitoring of pharmaceutical powder moisture in a fluidised bed dryer: An

       efficient methodology for chemometric model development. The Canadian Journal of

       Chemical Engineering, 90(2), 299-303.

Dhall, A., Halder, A., & Datta, A. K. (2012). Multiphase and multicomponent transport with

       phase change during meat cooking. Journal of Food Engineering, 113(2), 299-309.

       doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2012.05.030

                                               49
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 51]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Dhall, A., Squier, G., Geremew, M., Wood, W. A., George, J., & Datta, A. K. (2012). Modeling

       of multiphase transport during drying of honeycomb ceramic substrates. Drying

       Technology, 30(6), 607-618.

Duizer, L. (2001). A review of acoustic research for studying the sensory perception of crisp,

       crunchy and crackly textures. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 12(1), 17-24.

Efendiev, Y., & Hou, T. Y. (2009). Multiscale finite element methods: theory and applications

       (Vol. 4): Springer Science & Business Media.

Erbay, Z., & Icier, F. (2010). A review of thin layer drying of foods: theory, modeling, and

       experimental results. Critical reviews in food science and nutrition, 50(5), 441-464.

Esveld, D., Van Der Sman, R., Van Dalen, G., Van Duynhoven, J., & Meinders, M. (2012).

       Effect of morphology on water sorption in cellular solid foods. Part I: Pore scale network

       model. Journal of food engineering, 109(2), 301-310.

Esveld, D., van der Sman, R., Witek, M., Windt, C., van As, H., van Duynhoven, J., & Meinders,

       M. (2012). Effect of morphology on water sorption in cellular solid foods. Part II:

       Sorption in cereal crackers. Journal of food engineering, 109(2), 311-320.

Falcone, P., Baiano, A., Zanini, F., Mancini, L., Tromba, G., Montanari, F., & Nobile, M.

       (2004). A Novel Approach to the Study of Bread Porous Structure: Phase‐contrast X‐Ray

       Microtomography. Journal of Food Science, 69(1), FEP38-FEP43.

                                                50
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 52]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Fanta, S. W., Abera, M. K., Aregawi, W. A., Ho, Q. T., Verboven, P., Carmeliet, J., & Nicolai,

       B. M. (2014). Microscale modeling of coupled water transport and mechanical

       deformation of fruit tissue during dehydration. Journal of Food Engineering, 124, 86-96.

Fanta, S. W., Vanderlinden, W., Abera, M. K., Verboven, P., Karki, R., Ho, Q. T., . . . Nicolaï,

       B. M. (2012). Water transport properties of artificial cell walls. Journal of Food

       Engineering, 108(3), 393-402.

Farid, M. M., & Chen, X. D. (1998). The analysis of heat and mass transfer during frying of food

       using a moving boundary solution procedure. Heat and Mass Transfer, 34(1), 69-77.

       doi:10.1007/s002310050233

Farkas, B., Singh, R., & Rumsey, T. (1996). Modeling heat and mass transfer in immersion

       frying. I, model development. Journal of Food Engineering, 29(2), 211-226.

Farkas, B. E., Singh, R. P., & Rumsey, T. R. (1996). Modeling heat and mass transfer in

       immersion frying. I, model development. Journal of Food Engineering, 29(2), 211-226.

       doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0260-8774(95)00072-0

Feng, H., Tang, J., Cavalieri, R., & Plumb, O. (2001). Heat and mass transport in microwave

       drying of porous materials in a spouted bed. AIChE Journal, 47(7), 1499-1512.

Feyissa, A. H., Gernaey, K., Ashokkumar, S., & Adler-Nissen, J. (2011). Modelling of coupled

       heat and mass transfer during a contact baking process. Journal of Food Engineering,

       106(3), 228-235.

                                                51
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 53]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Fletcher, D., Guo, B., Harvie, D., Langrish, T., Nijdam, J., & Williams, J. (2006). What is

       important in the simulation of spray dryer performance and how do current CFD models

       perform? Applied Mathematical Modelling, 30(11), 1281-1292.

Garini, Y., Vermolen, B. J., & Young, I. T. (2005). From micro to nano: recent advances in high-

       resolution microscopy. Current opinion in biotechnology, 16(1), 3-12.

Gharsallaoui, A., Roudaut, G., Chambin, O., Voilley, A., & Saurel, R. (2007). Applications of

       spray-drying in microencapsulation of food ingredients: An overview. Food Research

       International, 40(9), 1107-1121.

Gou, P., Santos-Garces, E., Høy, M., Wold, J., Liland, K., & Fulladosa, E. (2013). Feasibility of

       NIR interactance hyperspectral imaging for on-line measurement of crude composition in

       vacuum packed dry-cured ham slices. Meat science, 95(2), 250-255.

Gross, R. A., & Kalra, B. (2002). Biodegradable polymers for the environment. Science,

       297(5582), 803-807.

Guessasma, S., Chaunier, L., Della Valle, G., & Lourdin, D. (2011). Mechanical modelling of

       cereal solid foods. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 22(4), 142-153.

Gulati, T., & Datta, A. K. (2015). Mechanistic understanding of case-hardening and texture

       development during drying of food materials. Journal of Food Engineering, 166, 119-

       138.

                                                52
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 54]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Halder, A., & Datta, A. K. (2012). Surface heat and mass transfer coefficients for multiphase

       porous media transport models with rapid evaporation. Food and Bioproducts

       Processing, 90(3), 475-490.

Halder, A., Datta, A. K., & Spanswick, R. M. (2011). Water transport in cellular tissues during

       thermal processing. AIChE Journal, 57(9), 2574-2588.

Halder, A., Dhall, A., & Datta, A. (2007a). An improved, easily implementable, porous media

       based model for deep-fat frying: Part I: Model development and input parameters. Food

       and Bioproducts Processing, 85(3), 209-219.

Halder, A., Dhall, A., & Datta, A. (2007b). An improved, easily implementable, porous media

       based model for deep-fat frying: Part II: Results, validation and sensitivity analysis. Food

       and Bioproducts Processing, 85(3), 220-230.

Halder, A., Dhall, A., & Datta, A. K. (2007). An Improved, Easily Implementable, Porous Media

       Based Model for Deep-Fat Frying: Part II: Results, Validation and Sensitivity Analysis.

       Food and Bioproducts Processing, 85(3), 220-230.

       doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1205/fbp07034

Halder, A., Dhall, A., & Datta, A. K. (2010). Modeling Transport in Porous Media With Phase

       Change: Applications to Food Processing. Journal of Heat Transfer, 133(3), 031010-

       031010. doi:10.1115/1.4002463

                                                53
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 55]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Halder, A. D., A. Datta, A. K. (2007). An Improved, Easily Implementable, Porous Media Based

       Model for Deep-Fat Frying: Part I: Model Development and Input Parameters. Food and

       Bioproducts Processing, 85(3), 209-219. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1205/fbp07033

Hills, B. P., & Remigereau, B. (1997). NMR studies of changes in subcellular water

       compartmentation in parenchyma apple tissue during drying and freezing. International

       Journal of Food Science and Technology, 32(1), 51-61.

Ho, Q. T., Carmeliet, J., Datta, A. K., Defraeye, T., Delele, M. A., Herremans, E., . . . van der

       Sman, R. (2013). Multiscale modeling in food engineering. Journal of Food Engineering,

       114(3), 279-291.

Ho, Q. T., Verboven, P., Mebatsion, H. K., Verlinden, B., Vandewalle, S., & Nicolaï, B. (2009).

       Microscale mechanisms of gas exchange in fruit tissue. New Phytologist, 182(1), 163-

       174.

Ho, Q. T., Verboven, P., Verlinden, B. E., Herremans, E., Wevers, M., Carmeliet, J., & Nicolaï,

       B. M. (2011). A three-dimensional multiscale model for gas exchange in fruit. Plant

       Physiology, 155(3), 1158-1168.

Ho, Q. T., Verboven, P., Verlinden, B. E., & Nicolaï, B. M. (2010). A model for gas transport in

       pear fruit at multiple scales. Journal of experimental botany, erq026.

Huang, H., Yu, H., Xu, H., & Ying, Y. (2008). Near infrared spectroscopy for on/in-line

       monitoring of quality in foods and beverages: A review. Journal of Food Engineering,

       87(3), 303-313.

                                                 54
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 56]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Ingram, G., Cameron, I., & Hangos, K. (2004). Classification and analysis of integrating

       frameworks in multiscale modelling. Chemical engineering science, 59(11), 2171-2187.

Joardder, M., Brown, R., Kumar, C., & Karim, M. Effect of Cell Wall Properties on Porosity and

       Shrinkage of Dried Apple. International Journal of Food Properties, In press.

       doi:10.1080/10942912.2014.980945

Joardder, M. U., Karim, A., Kumar, C., & Brown, R. J. (2015). Porosity: Establishing the

       Relationship between Drying Parameters and Dried Food Quality: Springer.

Joardder, M. U., Karim, A., Kumar, C., & Brown, R. J. (2016a). Factors Affecting Porosity

       Porosity (pp. 25-46): Springer.

Joardder, M. U., Karim, A., Kumar, C., & Brown, R. J. (2016b). Pore Formation and Evolution

       During Drying Porosity (pp. 15-23): Springer.

Joardder, M. U., Kumar, C., & Karim, M. (2015). Food structure: its formation and relationships

       with other properties. Critical reviews in food science and nutrition.

Joardder, M. U. H., Kumar, C., Brown, R. J., & Karim, M. A. (2015). A micro-level

       investigation of the solid displacement method for porosity determination of dried food.

       Journal of Food Engineering, 166, 156-164.

       doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2015.05.034

Juge, N. (2006). Plant protein inhibitors of cell wall degrading enzymes. Trends in plant science,

       11(7), 359-367.

                                                55
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 57]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Karunasena, H., Gu, Y., Brown, R., & Senadeera, W. (2015). Numerical investigation of plant

       tissue porosity and its influence on cellular level shrinkage during drying. Biosystems

       Engineering, 132, 71-87.

Karunasena, H., Senadeera, W., Brown, R. J., & Gu, Y. (2014). A particle based model to

       simulate microscale morphological changes of plant tissues during drying. Soft matter,

       10(29), 5249-5268.

Karunasena, H., Senadeera, W., Gu, Y., & Brown, R. J. (2014). A coupled SPH-DEM model for

       micro-scale structural deformations of plant cells during drying. Applied Mathematical

       Modelling, 38(15), 3781-3801.

Kaya, A., Aydın, O., & Dincer, I. 2008 . Experimental and numerical investigation of heat and

       mass transfer during drying of Hayward kiwi fruits (Actinidia Deliciosa Planch). Journal

       of Food Engineering, 88(3), 323-330.

Khan, M., Kumar, C., Joardder, M., & Karim, M. (2016). Multiphase porous media modelling: A

       novel approach of predicting food processing performance. Critical reviews in food

       science and nutrition.

Ko, S., & Gunasekaran, S. (2007). Error correction of confocal microscopy images for in situ

       food microstructure evaluation. Journal of Food Engineering, 79(3), 935-944.

Konishi, Y., Kobayashi, M., & Miura, K. i. (2010). Characterisation of water species revealed in

       the drying operation of Todarodes pacificus Steenstrup using water proton NMR analysis.

       International journal of food science & technology, 45(9), 1889-1894.

                                               56
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 58]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Konstankiewicz, K., & Zdunek, A. (2001). Influence of turgor and cell size on the cracking of

       potato tissue. International agrophysics, 15(1), 27-30.

Krokida, M. K., Zogzas, N. P., & Maroulis, Z. B. (1997). Modelling shrinkage and porosity

       during vacuum dehydration. International Journal of Food Science & Technology, 32(6),

       445-458. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.1997.tb02119.x

Kumar C, J., M.U.H., Farrell, T.W. and Karim, M. A. (2015). Multiphase porous media model

       for Intermittent microwave convective drying (IMCD) of food. . International Journal of

       Thermal Sciences, (accepted on 10 Dec 2015)

Kumar, C., Joardder, M. U. H., Farrell, T. W., Millar, G. J., & Karim, A. (2014). Multiphase

       porous media model for heat and mass transfer during drying of agricultural products.

Kumar, C., Joardder, M. U. H., Karim, A., Millar, G. J., & Amin, Z. (2014). Temperature

       redistribution modelling during intermittent microwave convective heating. Procedia

       Engineering, 90, 544-549.

Kumar, C., Millar, G. J., & Karim, M. (2015). Effective diffusivity and evaporative cooling in

       convective drying of food material. Drying Technology, 33(2), 227-237.

Lee, S.-J., Saravanan, R. S., Damasceno, C. M., Yamane, H., Kim, B.-D., & Rose, J. K. (2004).

       Digging deeper into the plant cell wall proteome. Plant physiology and Biochemistry,

       42(12), 979-988.

Li, S., Dickinson, L., & Chinachoti, P. (1996). Proton relaxation of starch and gluten by solid-

       state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Cereal chemistry, 73(6), 736-743.

                                                57
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 59]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Li, S., Dickinson, L., & Chinachoti, P. 1998 . Mo ility of ―unfreeza le‖ and ―freeza le‖ water

       in waxy corn starch by 2H and 1H NMR. Journal of agricultural and food chemistry,

       46(1), 62-71.

Limbach, H. J., & Kremer, K. (2006). Multi-scale modelling of polymers: perspectives for food

       materials. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 17(5), 215-219.

Limodin, N., Réthoré, J., Adrien, J., Buffière, J.-Y., Hild, F., & Roux, S. (2011). Analysis and

       artifact correction for volume correlation measurements using tomographic images from

       a laboratory X-ray source. Experimental mechanics, 51(6), 959-970.

Ludikhuyze, L., & Hendrickx, M. E. (2001). Effects of high pressure on chemical reactions

       related to food quality Ultra high pressure treatments of foods (pp. 167-188): Springer.

Madiouli, J., Sghaier, J., Lecomte, D., & Sammouda, H. (2012). Determination of porosity

       change from shrinkage curves during drying of food material. Food and Bioproducts

       Processing, 90(1), 43-51. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fbp.2010.12.002

Maldague, X. P. (2002). Introduction to NDT by active infrared thermography. Materials

       Evaluation, 60(9), 1060-1073.

Marousis, S., & Saravacos, G. (1990). Density and porosity in drying starch materials. Journal of

       Food Science, 55(5), 1367-1372.

Mayor, L., & Sereno, A. (2004). Modelling shrinkage during convective drying of food

       materials: a review. Journal of Food Engineering, 61(3), 373-386.

                                                58
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 60]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

McCann, M. C., Bush, M., Milioni, D., Sado, P., Stacey, N. J., Catchpole, G., . . . Ulvskov, P.

       (2001). Approaches to understanding the functional architecture of the plant cell wall.

       Phytochemistry, 57(6), 811-821.

Mebatsion, H., Verboven, P., Verlinden, B., Ho, Q. T., Nguyen, T. A., & Nicolaï, B. (2006).

       Microscale modelling of fruit tissue using Voronoi tessellations. Computers and

       electronics in agriculture, 52(1), 36-48.

Mebatsion, H. K., Verboven, P., Ho, Q. T., Verlinden, B., & Nicolaï, B. (2008). Modelling fruit

       (micro) structures, why and how? Trends in Food Science & Technology, 19(2), 59-66.

Mercier, S., Marcos, B., Moresoli, C., Mondor, M., & Villeneuve, S. (2014). Modeling of

       internal moisture transport during durum wheat pasta drying. Journal of Food

       Engineering, 124(0), 19-27. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2013.09.028

Mercier, S., Marcos, B., Moresoli, C., Mondor, M., & Villeneuve, S. (2014). Modeling of

       internal moisture transport during durum wheat pasta drying. Journal of Food

       Engineering, 124, 19-27.

Miedziejko, E., Plenzler, G., NAPIERAŁA, D., & NAROŻNA, A. 199 . 1H‐NMR spin‐spin

       relaxation time assessment of the reflection coefficient of the Triticale seed cell wall–

       plasmalemma barrier to mannitol. Plant, Cell & Environment, 19(12), 1443-1448.

Mitchell, J. (1998). Water and food macromolecules. Functional properties of food

       macromolecules, 50-76.

                                                   59
                                                        ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 61]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Mujumdar, A. S. (2007). An overview of innovation in industrial drying: current status and R&D

       needs Drying of Porous Materials (pp. 3-18): Springer.

Nassehi, V., & Parvazinia, M. (2011). Finite element modeling of multiscale transport

       phenomena: World Scientific.

Nguyen, T. A., Dresselaers, T., Verboven, P., D'hallewin, G., Culeddu, N., Van Hecke, P., &

       Nicolaï, B. (2006). Finite element modelling and MRI validation of 3D transient water

       profiles in pears during postharvest storage. Journal of the Science of Food and

       Agriculture, 86(5), 745-756.

Nguyen, T. A., Verboven, P., Scheerlinck, N., Vandewalle, S., & Nicolaï, B. M. (2006).

       Estimation of effective diffusivity of pear tissue and cuticle by means of a numerical

       water diffusion model. Journal of Food Engineering, 72(1), 63-72.

Ni, H., & Datta, A. (1999a). Heat and moisture transfer in baking of potato slabs. Drying

       Technology, 17(10), 2069-2092.

Ni, H., & Datta, A. (1999b). Moisture, oil and energy transport during deep-fat frying of food

       materials. Food and Bioproducts Processing, 77(3), 194-204.

Ni, H., Datta, A., & Torrance, K. (1999). Moisture transport in intensive microwave heating of

       biomaterials: a multiphase porous media model. International Journal of Heat and Mass

       Transfer, 42(8), 1501-1512.

Ni, H., & Datta, A. K. (1999). Heat and moisture transfer in baking of potato slabs. Drying

       Technology, 17(10), 2069-2092. doi:10.1080/07373939908917673

                                               60
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 62]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Nicolai, B., Verboven, P., Scheerlinck, N., & De Baerdemaeker, J. (1998). Numerical analysis of

       the propagation of random parameter fluctuations in time and space during thermal food

       processes. Journal of Food Engineering, 38(3), 259-278.

Nijhuis, H., Torringa, H., Muresan, S., Yuksel, D., Leguijt, C., & Kloek, W. (1998). Approaches

       to improving the quality of dried fruit and vegetables. Trends in Food Science &

       Technology, 9(1), 13-20.

Nobel, P. S. (1999). Physicochemical and environmental plant physiology: Academic press.

Ousegui, A., Moresoli, C., Dostie, M., & Marcos, B. (2010). Porous multiphase approach for

       baking process–Explicit formulation of evaporation rate. Journal of Food Engineering,

       100(3), 535-544.

Ousegui, A., Moresoli, C., Dostie, M., & Marcos, B. (2010). Porous multiphase approach for

       baking process – Explicit formulation of evaporation rate. Journal of Food Engineering,

       100(3), 535-544. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2010.05.003

Papasidero, D., Manenti, F., & Pierucci, S. (2015). Bread baking modeling: Coupling heat

       transfer and weight loss by the introduction of an explicit vaporization term. Journal of

       Food Engineering, 147, 79-88.

Paredes, J., Martınez-Alonso, A., & Tascón, J. (2003). Application of scanning tunneling and

       atomic force microscopies to the characterization of microporous and mesoporous

       materials. Microporous and mesoporous materials, 65(2), 93-126.

                                               61
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 63]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Paull, R. (1999). Effect of temperature and relative humidity on fresh commodity quality.

       Postharvest Biology and Technology, 15(3), 263-277.

Pavliotis, G. A., & Stuart, A. (2008). Multiscale methods: averaging and homogenization:

       Springer Science & Business Media.

Perré, P. (2007). Multiscale aspects of heat and mass transfer during drying. Transport in Porous

       Media, 66(1-2), 59-76.

Perré, P. (2010). Multiscale modeling of drying as a powerful extension of the macroscopic

       approach: application to solid wood and biomass processing. Drying Technology, 28(8),

       944-959.

Perré, P. (2011). A review of modern computational and experimental tools relevant to the field

       of drying. Drying Technology, 29(13), 1529-1541.

Perré, P. (2015). The Proper Use of Mass Diffusion Equations in Drying Modeling: Introducing

       the Drying Intensity Number. Drying Technology, 33(15-16), 1949-1962.

Perré, P., & Huber, F. (2007). Measurement of free shrinkage at the tissue level using an optical

       microscope with an immersion objective: results obtained for Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga

       menziesii) and spruce (Picea abies). Annals of forest science, 64(3), 255-265.

Perré, P., & Rémond, R. (2006). A dual-scale computational model of kiln wood drying

       including single board and stack level simulation. Drying Technology, 24(9), 1069-1074.

                                                62
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 64]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Perré, P., Rémond, R., Colin, J., Mougel, E., & Almeida, G. (2012). Energy consumption in the

       convective drying of timber analyzed by a multiscale computational model. Drying

       Technology, 30(11-12), 1136-1146.

Prothon, F., Ahrné, L. l. M., Funebo, T., Kidman, S., Langton, M., & Sjöholm, I. (2001). Effects

       of combined osmotic and microwave dehydration of apple on texture, microstructure and

       rehydration characteristics. LWT-Food Science and Technology, 34(2), 95-101.

Putranto, A., & Chen, X. D. (2015). An assessment on modeling drying processes: Equilibrium

       multiphase model and the spatial reaction engineering approach (S-REA). Chemical

       Engineering Research and Design, 94, 660-672.

Rahman, M., Mustayen, A., Mekhilef, S., & Saidur, R. (2015). The Optimization of Solar Drying

       of Grain by Using a Genetic Algorithm. International Journal of Green Energy, 12(12),

       1222-1231.

Rahman, M. S. (2001). Towards prediction of porosity in food foods during drying: A brief

       review. Drying Technology, 19(1), 3-15.

Rahman, M. S. (2008). 4 Dehydration and Microstructure. Advances in Food Dehydration, 97.

Rakesh, V., & Datta, A. K. (2011). Microwave puffing: Determination of optimal conditions

       using a coupled multiphase porous media–Large deformation model. Journal of Food

       Engineering, 107(2), 152-163.

                                               63
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 65]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Rastogi, N., Raghavarao, K., Niranjan, K., & Knorr, D. (2002). Recent developments in osmotic

       dehydration: methods to enhance mass transfer. Trends in Food Science & Technology,

       13(2), 48-59.

Ross, K. A., Campanella, O. H., & Okos, M. R. (2002). The effect of porosity on glass transition

       measurement. International Journal of Food Properties, 5(3), 611-628. doi:10.1081/JFP-

       120015496

Sagar, V., & Kumar, P. S. (2010). Recent advances in drying and dehydration of fruits and

       vegetables: a review. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 47(1), 15-26.

Scheerlinck, N., Verboven, P., Stigter, J. D., De Baerdemaeker, J., Van Impe, J. F., & Nicolai, B.

       M. (2000). Stochastic finite-element analysis of coupled heat and mass transfer problems

       with random field parameters. Numerical Heat Transfer: Part B: Fundamentals, 37(3),

       309-330.

Stawczyk, J., Munoz, I., Collell, C., & Comaposada, J. (2009). Control system for sausage

       drying based on on-line NIR aw determination. Drying Technology, 27(12), 1338-1343.

Street, H. E. (1973). Plant tissue and cell culture (Vol. 11): Univ of California Press.

Strumiłło, C. 200 . Perspectives on developments in drying. Drying Technology, 24(9), 1059-

       1068.

Van der Sman, R. (2007). Soft condensed matter perspective on moisture transport in cooking

       meat. AIChE Journal, 53(11), 2986-2995.

                                                 64
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 66]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Van der Sman, R. (2013). Modeling cooking of chicken meat in industrial tunnel ovens with the

       Flory–Rehner theory. Meat science, 95(4), 940-957.

Van der Sman, R., & Van Der Goot, A. (2009). The science of food structuring. Soft matter,

       5(3), 501-510.

Van Liedekerke, P., Ghysels, P., Tijskens, E., Samaey, G., Smeedts, B., Roose, D., & Ramon, H.

       (2010). A particle-based model to simulate the micromechanics of single-plant

       parenchyma cells and aggregates. Physical biology, 7(2), 026006.

 eraver eke, E. A., er oven, P., an Oostveldt, P., & Nicolaı, . M. 2003 . Prediction of

       moisture loss across the cuticle of apple (Malus sylvestris subsp. Mitis (Wallr.)) during

       storage: part 1. Model development and determination of diffusion coefficients.

       Postharvest Biology and Technology, 30(1), 75-88.

Vickers, Z., & Bourne, M. C. (1976). A psychoacoustical theory of crispness. Journal of Food

       Science, 41(5), 1158-1164. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.1976.tb14407.x

Wang, N., & Brennan, J. (1995). Changes in structure, density and porosity of potato during

       dehydration. Journal of Food Engineering, 24(1), 61-76.

Warning, A., Dhall, A., Mitrea, D., & Datta, A. K. (2012). Porous media based model for deep-

       fat vacuum frying potato chips. Journal of Food Engineering, 110(3), 428-440.

       doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2011.12.024

                                               65
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 67]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Warning, A. D., Arquiza, J., & Datta, A. K. (2015). A Multiphase Porous Medium Transport

       Model with Distributed Sublimation Front to Simulate Vacuum Freeze Drying. Food and

       Bioproducts Processing, 94, 637-648.

Whitaker, S. (1977). Simultaneous heat, mass, and momentum transfer in porous media: a theory

       of drying.

Whitaker, S. (1998). Coupled transport in multiphase systems: a theory of drying. Advances in

       heat transfer, 31, 1-104.

Witek, M., Węglarz, W., De Jong, L., an Dalen, G., lonk, J., Heussen, P., . . . an

       Duynhoven, J. (2010). The structural and hydration properties of heat-treated rice studied

       at multiple length scales. Food chemistry, 120(4), 1031-1040.

Wood, S. A., Zerhouni, E. A., Hoford, J. D., Hoffman, E. A., & Mitzner, W. (1995).

       Measurement of three-dimensional lung tree structures by using computed tomography.

       Journal of Applied Physiology, 79(5), 1687-1697.

Yamsaengsung, R., & Moreira, R. (2002). Modeling the transport phenomena and structural

       changes during deep fat frying: Part II: model solution & validation. Journal of Food

       Engineering, 53(1), 11-25.

Yamsaengsung, R., & Moreira, R. G. (2002). Modeling the transport phenomena and structural

       changes during deep fat frying: Part II: model solution &amp; validation. Journal of

       Food Engineering, 53(1), 11-25. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0260-8774(01)00135-2

                                               66
                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 68]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Yoshikawa, K., & Ohsaka, A. (1979). 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopic study of rat organs.

       Physiological chemistry and physics, 12(6), 515-520.

Yue, X., & Weinan, E. (2007). The local microscale problem in the multiscale modeling of

       strongly heterogeneous media: Effects of boundary conditions and cell size. Journal of

       Computational Physics, 222(2), 556-572.

Zhang, J., & Datta, A. (2004). Some considerations in modeling of moisture transport in heating

       of hygroscopic materials. Drying Technology, 22(8), 1983-2008.

Zhang, J., Datta, A., & Mukherjee, S. (2005). Transport processes and large deformation during

       baking of bread. AIChE Journal, 51(9), 2569-2580.

Zhang, Z., & Kong, N. (2012). Nonequilibrium Thermal Dynamic Modeling of Porous Medium

       Vacuum Drying Process. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, 2012, 1-22.

Ziaiifar, A. M., Achir, N., Courtois, F., Trezzani, I., & Trystram, G. (2008). Review of

       mechanisms, conditions, and factors involved in the oil uptake phenomenon during the

       deep‐fat frying process. International journal of food science & technology, 43(8), 1410-

       1423.

Zienkiewicz, O. C., & Taylor, R. L. (2005). The finite element method for solid and structural

       mechanics: Butterworth-heinemann.

                                                67
                                                     ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 69]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

      Table 1. Water transport mechanism inside food materials during dehydration

 Moisture Transfer During                Scale                    Reference
          Drying
Diffusion Vapor             Macroscale                   (Engels, Hendrickx, De
                                                         Samblanx, De Gryze, &
                                                         Tobback, 1986; Lewis, 1921)
                            Microscale                   (Nieto, Castro, & Alzamora,
                                                         2001)
            Surface         Macroscale                   (Jayasundera, Adhikari,
                                                         Aldred, & Ghandi, 2009;
                                                         Zogzas, Maroulis, &
                                                         Marinos-Kouris, 1994)
            Liquid          Macroscale                   (Raisul Islam, Ho, &
                                                         Mujumdar, 2003)
                            Microscale                   (Nieto et al., 2001; Shi & Le
                                                         Maguer, 2002)
Capillary                   Macroscale                   (Clement K Sankat &
                                                         Francois Castaigne, 2004)
Evaporation condensation    Macroscale                   (Bhandari & Howes, 1999)
Hydraulic flow              Macroscale                   (Clement K. Sankat &
                                                         Francois Castaigne, 2004)
Molecular diffusion         Microscale                   (José Miguel Aguilera,
                                                         Chiralt, & Fito, 2003; Karel
                                                         & Saguy, 1991)
Knudesn flow                Microscale                   (Sagara, 2001)
                            Macroscale                   (Rossello, Canellas, Simal, &
                                                         Berna, 1992)
Mutual diffusion            Macroscale                   (Sano & Yamamoto, 1993)
Slip flow                   Macroscale                   (Waananen, Litchfield, &
                                                         Okos, 1993)

                                           68
                                                 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 70]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

                           Table 2: Basic physics for single phase model

Physics                                               Equation
Energy                  T
               c p (       u.T )  .(kT )  H
conservation            t
               Where,  = density, c p = specific heat of the material, T = temperature,

               u = convective flow, K = thermal conductivity of the material, H = heat source, t
               = time
               c
                  . Deff c   u.c  R
Mass
conservation   t
               Where, c = moisture concentration, Deff = effective moisture diffusivity, R =

               production or consumption of moisture.

                                                 69
                                                      ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 71]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

                                          Table 3: The basic governing equation for multiphase modelling

Physics                                            Governing Equation                                                     Nomenclature

                                          Liquid                                                                         S = Saturation,
                                                       Sww  . nw   R
                                          water     t                                                                    P = Pressure,
                                                            kk             k k p        k k p                            = Dynamic
                                                    nw  w w r ,w P  w w r ,w c  w w r ,w c
                                                             w             w cw        w T
                                                                                                                          Viscosity,
                                                   (a) Convective flux                                                     = Porosity,
                                                   (b) Capillary flux due to concentration gradient
                                                                                                                           = Density,
                                                   (c) Capillary flux due to temperature gradient
                                                                                                                          k = Permeability
                                                                                                                          D = Diffusivity,
                                                                                                                          R = Evaporation
                                          Water                                                                 
                                                        Sg gv   . gv g r , g P   Sg g Deff , g v   R
                                                                               kk
Mass conservation

                                          vapor     t                          v                               
                                                                                                                          Q = Heat source
                                                                                                                           =Mass
                                                                                                                          fraction
                                                                                                                          K = Thermal
                                          Air       a  1  v
                                                                                                                          conductivity,
                                                     T
                                          eff cpeff    . ng hg  nwhw   .(keff T )  hfg Revap  Q
                        conservat

                                                                                                                          Cp = Specific
Energy

                                                     t
                                    ion

                                                                                                                          heat
                                                                                                                          t = time
                                          
                                              S  .ng   Revap ,
                                                                                             kg kr , g
                                                                                  ng  g               P ,             Subsript:
                                          t g g                                               i
Momentum Conservation

                                                                                                                          V= vapor
                                               PM g
                                          g                                                                             g = gas
                                                RT
                                                                                                                          a = air
                                                                                                                          w = water
                                                                                                                          s = solid
                                                                                                                          eff = effective
                                                                                                                          r = relative

                                                                               70
                                                                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 72]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

                        Table 4: Advance modelling approach

      Authors                      Materials                  Application area
    Nicolai et al.                  Apple                      Microstructure
                                                              characterization

    Defraeye et al                   Apple                Water transport model

  Halder and Datta                 Potato slab          Multiphase porous media
                                                                   flow
  Chaminda Prasad                    Apple              Microscale model (2D) for
  Karunasena et al.                                               drying
  Varabereke et al                   Apple              Microscale water transport
     Ho et al.                       Pear               Microscale gas exchange
   Van lekerdeke                     Apple               Calculating mechanical
                                                            properties of cell
  Patrick Perre et al                wood               Multi-scale model in wood
                                                                  drying
      Carr et al.                    wood               Duel scale model in wood
                                                                  drying

                                         71
                                              ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 73]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

      Table 5. Advance non-invasive technique for observing the drying process

 Experimental        Spatial resolution              Information Type

  Technique

     MRI                  20  m          Water density, velocity, properties

     NIR                  10  m               Moisture content, particle size

    NMR                    1 m            Moisture content and the drying

                                                            rate

  X ray micro            0.2  m               Deformation, crack formation,

 tomography                                moisture content, structure of the

                                                          material

     SEM                   3nm                    Deformation, shrinkage

                                                        observation

     TEM                    1A                    Deformation, shrinkage

                                                        observation

                                          72
                                               ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 74]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Figure 1. Demonstration of hierarchical structure of cellular based food materials (M. U.

                      Joardder, Karim, Kumar, & Brown, 2016a)

                                           73
                                                ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 75]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

      Figure 2. Classification of mathematical models in food drying

                                   74
                                        ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 76]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

           Figure 3. Empirical modeling approach

                            75
                                 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 77]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

      Figure 4. Concept of Multiscale modeling in drying technology

                                   76
                                        ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 78]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

    Figure 5. Multi scale approach presented by Patrick Perre (Perré, 2010).

                                      77
                                           ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 79]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

      Figure 6: Conventional RVE used by researchers (Datta, 2007a)

                                   78
                                        ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 80]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

          Figure 7. Cellular structure of Plant tissue

                              79
                                   ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 81]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

Figure 8. Schematic diagram of actual geometry of the microstructure of plan based tissue

                                           80
                                                ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 82]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

   Figure 9. A step by step representation for modeling of cell geometryFigure

                                       81
                                            ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 83]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

         10: Heterogeneous multiscale method framework

                              82
                                   ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 84]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

                     Define N spatial scales, i←1; Measure
                         material properties of scale 1

                          Measure topology of Scale i

                         Perform Numerical experiment
         i←i+1

          i<N

                       Compute material properties scale
                                    i+1

                              Apparent Material
                             properties of macro-
                                 scale model

         Figure 11. A sample of homogenization process

                              83
                                   ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 85]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

      Figure 12: Schematic representation of modern drying system

                                  84
                                       ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

[[PAGE 86]]
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT

       Figure 13. The schematic diagram of NIR spectroscopy

                               85
                                    ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
