[[PAGE 1]]
This may be the author’s version of a work that was submitted/accepted
for publication in the following source:

Khan, Md Imran H., Batuwatta Gamage, Chanaka Prabuddha, Karim,
Azharul, & Gu, YuanTong
(2022)
Fundamental Understanding of Heat and Mass Transfer Processes for
Physics-Informed Machine Learning-Based Drying Modelling.
Energies, 15(24), Article number: 9347.

This file was downloaded from: https://eprints.qut.edu.au/237046/

© 2022 The Authors

This work is covered by copyright. Unless the document is being made available under a
Creative Commons Licence, you must assume that re-use is limited to personal use and
that permission from the copyright owner must be obtained for all other uses. If the docu-
ment is available under a Creative Commons License (or other specified license) then refer
to the Licence for details of permitted re-use. It is a condition of access that users recog-
nise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights. If you believe that
this work infringes copyright please provide details by email to qut.copyright@qut.edu.au

License: Creative Commons: Attribution 4.0

Notice: Please note that this document may not be the Version of Record
(i.e. published version) of the work. Author manuscript versions (as Sub-
mitted for peer review or as Accepted for publication after peer review) can
be identified by an absence of publisher branding and/or typeset appear-
ance. If there is any doubt, please refer to the published source.

https://doi.org/10.3390/en15249347

[[PAGE 2]]
energies
Review
Fundamental Understanding of Heat and Mass Transfer
Processes for Physics-Informed Machine Learning-Based
Drying Modelling
Md Imran H. Khan 1,2, * , C. P. Batuwatta-Gamage 1 , M. A. Karim 1                          and YuanTong Gu 1

                                          1   School of Mechanical, Medical and Process Engineering, Queensland University of Technology (QUT),
                                              2 George St, Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia
                                          2   Research and Development, Agridry Dryers Pty Ltd., 13 Molloy St, Torrington, QLD 4350, Australia
                                          *   Correspondence: m23.khan@qut.edu.au or imran.duet56@gmail.com; Tel.: +61470415297

                                          Abstract: Drying is a complex process of simultaneous heat, mass, and momentum transport phe-
                                          nomena with continuous phase changes. Numerical modelling is one of the most effective tools to
                                          mechanistically express the different physics of drying processes for accurately predicting the drying
                                          kinetics and understanding the morphological changes during drying. However, the mathematical
                                          modelling of drying processes is complex and computationally very expensive due to multiphysics
                                          and the multiscale nature of heat and mass transfer during drying. Physics-informed machine
                                          learning (PIML)-based modelling has the potential to overcome these drawbacks and could be an
                                          exciting new addition to drying research for describing drying processes by embedding fundamental
                                          transport laws and constraints in machine learning models. To develop such a novel PIML-based
                                          model for drying applications, it is necessary to have a fundamental understanding of heat, mass,
                                          and momentum transfer processes and their mathematical formulation of drying processes, in addi-
Citation: Khan, M.I.H.;
Batuwatta-Gamage, C.P.; Karim,
                                          tion to data-driven modelling knowledge. Based on a comprehensive literature review, this paper
M.A.; Gu, Y. Fundamental                  presents two types of information: fundamental physics-based information about drying processes
Understanding of Heat and Mass            and data-driven modelling strategies to develop PIML-based models for drying applications. The
Transfer Processes for                    current status of physics-based models and PIML-based models and their limitations are discussed. A
Physics-Informed Machine                  sample PIML-based modelling framework for drying application is presented. Finally, the challenges
Learning-Based Drying Modelling.          of addressing simultaneous heat, mass, and momentum transport phenomena in PIML modelling
Energies 2022, 15, 9347. https://         for optimizing the drying process are presented at the end of this paper. It is expected that the
doi.org/10.3390/en15249347                information in this manuscript will be beneficial for further advancing the field.
Academic Editors: Dmitry Eskin and
Andrea Reverberi                          Keywords: heat and mass transfer; drying; physics-informed machine learning; porous media;
                                          conjugate modelling
Received: 19 September 2022
Accepted: 1 December 2022
Published: 9 December 2022

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral      1. Introduction
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                               Drying is a dominant industrial process that is intensely used for processing or pre-
published maps and institutional affil-
                                          serving bulk wet materials to inhibit the growth of bacteria, yeasts, and mould through
iations.
                                          the removal of water. For example, the drying process is widely used in diverse industrial
                                          sectors, including the agricultural, wood, seafood, pharmaceutical, paper, ceramic, and
                                          biomass processing industries. The current drying market, air drying, in particular, is
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
                                          worth USD 108.15 billion and is expected to be USD 166.92 billion by 2027 [1]. Despite this
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.        incredible potential, today’s drying industries have been experiencing difficulties with the
This article is an open access article    existing conventional drying systems, which are energy-intensive, and slow processes. De-
distributed under the terms and           pending on drying conditions, the drying process can account for up to 15% of all industrial
conditions of the Creative Commons        energy usage. Moreover, the deterioration in the quality of the dried products is one of the
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     major problems of today’s drying systems. These problems cannot be solved unless drying
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          systems are designed based on a fundamental understanding of the actual drying process
4.0/).                                    and characteristics of the products at different length scales. The drying process involves

Energies 2022, 15, 9347. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15249347                                                https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

[[PAGE 3]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                             2 of 27

                          complex simultaneous heat, mass, and momentum transport processes [2]. Numerical
                          modelling is a unique tool to accurately describe these complex drying processes [3], and,
                          therefore, significant research has been conducted to develop numerical modelling for
                          drying processes.
                                Based on the level of accuracy and approaches, the existing drying models can be cate-
                          gorised as first-, second-, third-, fourth-, and fifth-generation models. The first-generation
                          models are purely empirical and depend on the particular products and the drying con-
                          ditions [4,5]. The specific product and process dependency of the first-generation models
                          restrict their applications to other products or processes. To overcome these problems of the
                          first-generation models, a slightly improved model, called the second-generation model,
                          has been introduced [6]. In this modelling strategy, a physics-based approach is integrated
                          with the empirical modelling approaches. Although these models help to provide a better
                          understanding of drying kinetics, a realistic understanding of drying processes (for ex-
                          ample, instantaneous moisture and temperature distribution) cannot be predicted using
                          the second-generation models. This being the case, the next generation of drying models
                          can be referred to as the third generation. They are developed based on fundamental
                          physics-based approaches, such as conservation of mass and energy, Newton’s laws of
                          motion, and Navier–Stokes equations for fluid flow. The third-generation models are
                          sometimes developed based on single-phase (liquid water transport) phenomena [7–13].
                          Porous materials, such as food and wood, contain multiple species, including liquid water,
                          gas (vapour and air), and solid content. In drying modelling, consideration of these multi-
                          ple species is intensely important for an accurate prediction of drying kinetics; therefore,
                          multiphase models are developed [2,14–16]. These third-generation models are entirely
                          based on the macro- or tissue scale. However, porous materials, particularly food materials,
                          are multiscale in nature, containing different irregular cellular structures. As the mass
                          transfer processes initiate at the cell level during drying, consideration of the cellular water
                          transport processes is crucial for accurate prediction of drying kinetics and optimising
                          drying processes. To account for both cellular (microscale) and macro- (tissue)-scale water
                          transport processes, multiscale modelling strategies have been introduced. This most
                          advanced level of modelling can be referred to as the fourth generation of drying models. It
                          is important to know the fundamental physics behind the transport phenomena at different
                          length scales to mathematically describe the simultaneous heat and mass transfer processes.
                          Although the aforementioned physics-based models can provide better insights, including
                          the instantaneous and spatial distribution of moisture and temperature, the development of
                          purely physics-based models is intensely challenging and computationally very expensive.
                                In order to reduce the computational complexity, data-driven modelling, such as
                          machine learning (ML)-based modelling, can be implemented for food drying applications.
                          ML-based approaches can effectively model the nonlinear complex heat and mass transfer
                          processes during drying and are able to predict drying kinetics without much computa-
                          tional effort, such as traditional modelling techniques. However, ML-based models struggle
                          to generate accurate predictions when the dataset is ill-posed, noisy, and insufficient [17,18].
                          In such cases, the incorporation of physics into observational data through PIML provides
                          promising benefits to most science and engineering applications [18–20]. This category of
                          the model can be referred to as the fifth-generation drying model. Although numerous
                          studies have been conducted to develop fundamental physics-based modelling, as well as
                          machine-learning-based models, no PIML-based drying model has been developed taking
                          advantage of both the ML- and physics-based base modelling approaches. To address this
                          major research gap, significant scientific research is required. This paper aims to present
                          the fundamental understanding of the physics that is used for food drying modelling and
                          the potential PIML-based modelling strategies. This paper is sequentially organised by
                          first presenting an understanding of different categories of existing drying models and the
                          necessity of PIML-based modelling in Section 1. Then, the basic drying processes (drying
                          mechanism) are presented in Section 2. The physics that drives the drying processes are
                          discussed in Section 3. Section 4 presents the status of the existing mathematical modelling,

[[PAGE 4]]
sequentially organised by first presenting an understanding of different categories of ex-
                           isting drying models and the necessity of PIML-based modelling in Section 1. Then, the
Energies 2022, 15, 9347    basic drying processes (drying mechanism) are presented in Section 2. The physics                     that
                                                                                                                              3 of 27
                           drives the drying processes are discussed in Section 3. Section 4 presents the status of the
                           existing mathematical modelling, including PIML, and its limitations. A sample PIML-
                           based modelling
                          including     PIML, andframework      is presented
                                                      its limitations.         in Section
                                                                         A sample          5. Spatial
                                                                                    PIML-based        distributions
                                                                                                   modelling         of airflow
                                                                                                                framework        sig-
                                                                                                                             is pre-
                           nificantly   affect drying    kinetics,  and,  therefore, conjugation   of airflow  (integration
                          sented in Section 5. Spatial distributions of airflow significantly affect drying kinetics, and,   of spa-
                           tial airflow
                          therefore,     distribution
                                       conjugation     of with  the(integration
                                                          airflow   drying model)    is important
                                                                                 of spatial airflowindistribution
                                                                                                      food drying    modelling.
                                                                                                                   with the dryingAn
                           understanding
                          model)               of the
                                    is important        airflow
                                                    in food       conjugate
                                                              drying         modelling
                                                                       modelling.         is presented in
                                                                                    An understanding     of Section  6. Finally,
                                                                                                            the airflow  conjugatethe
                           current challenges
                          modelling                of drying
                                        is presented             modelling,
                                                         in Section           including
                                                                      6. Finally,         PIML-based
                                                                                  the current            models,
                                                                                                challenges         are discussed
                                                                                                            of drying   modelling,  in
                           Section 7.PIML-based models, are discussed in Section 7.
                          including

                              DryingMechanism
                          2.2.Drying   Mechanism
                                 Duringconvective
                                During    convectivehot     airdrying,
                                                        hotair  drying,hot     airisissupplied
                                                                          hotair                  acrossthe
                                                                                       suppliedacross           moistproducts.
                                                                                                           themoist              The
                                                                                                                      products.The
                           heat transfer occurs from the surface of the products to the centre through conduction,
                          heat  transfer  occurs   from   the surface   of the  products      to the  centre  through  conduction,
                           convection,and
                          convection,    andphase     change.Due
                                             phasechange.      Dueto    the continuous
                                                                     tothe  continuoussupplysupplyof     heat energy,
                                                                                                     of heat          masstransfer
                                                                                                              energy,mass   transfer
                           occurs through evaporation from the surface of the products to the environment.
                          occurs   through  evaporation    from  the  surface  of the   products   to the environment.       Moreo-
                                                                                                                         Moreover,
                                 the internal
                           ver,internal
                          the           mass mass
                                               transfer   occursoccurs
                                                       transfer   throughthrough      diffusion
                                                                              diffusion           capillary
                                                                                           capillary          flowthe
                                                                                                       flow and    and  the viscous
                                                                                                                      viscous  flow
                           flow inside
                          inside         the products
                                  the products            dueconcentration
                                                 due to the                   gradientsgradients
                                                               to the concentration                     [21]. A conceptual
                                                                                            [21]. A conceptual               under-
                                                                                                                  understanding   of
                          the  drying  process  is presented   in Figure   1.
                           standing of the drying process is presented in Figure 1.

                                                           Dryer
                                                           Tray                                                Products

                                       Warm &
                                                                                                                Hot fluid in
                                       moist fluid
                                       Out

                                                              Free
                             process (at dryer scale)

                                                              stream
                                                                                                              Hot air
                                                               air flow
                             External transport

                                                           Mass                                 Boundary layer
                                                           fluxes
                                                        Evaporation                                 Boundary layer
                                                                          Radiation                 thickness
                                Internal transport

                                                            Diffusion
                                                            convection    Conduction      Porous media
                                                                          Convection
                                                                          Phase change
                                 process

                                                                                           Product-air interactions

                                      Schematicrepresentation
                           Figure1.1.Schematic
                          Figure                                   convectionair
                                                representationofofconvection      dryingprocesses.
                                                                              airdrying  processes.

                                The drying processes can be defined by their drying kinetics, such as drying rate,
                          which is the function of moisture content, as shown in Figure 2. Theoretically, the drying
                          rate curve can be divided into three regions. At the beginning of drying, the product is full
                          of moisture content. It could be at Point A or A’, depending on whether the product remains
                          at a cold or hot temperature. Once the drying processes have progressed, a constant drying
                          rate curve can be observed at the early stage of drying (Points “B-C” in Figure 2). During

[[PAGE 5]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                      4 of 27

                                   the constant rate period, free moisture evaporates from the surface to the surroundings,
                                   and the drying rate remains almost steady. However, this constant rate period sometimes
                                   cannot be found in practical applications due to non-uniform heating or uneven product
                                   distribution. During the constant rate period, moisture also migrates from the core to
                                   the surface through diffusion. This diffusion process is mainly due to the concentration
                                   gradient that is developed by the evaporation process of surface moisture. Through this
                                   process of drying, the moisture content of the products decreases and reaches its ‘critical
                                   moisture content’ point (Point C in Figure 2). This is the time when inequality between
                                   evaporation from the surface and water diffusion from the inside to the surface becomes
                                   apparent. When the moisture content reaches its critical moisture content point, the drying
                                   rate starts to fall, and it gradually decreases. This is mainly due to the lower availability of
                                   free water but the greater availability of bound water inside the products. As the bound
                                   moisture is tightly held inside the cellular compartment of the products [22], it takes longer
                                   to migrate through periodic cell rupture and capillary diffusion processes and becomes
                                   free water for transport. Consequently, the drying rate gradually falls, as shown in Figure 2
                                   (“C-D”). During this first falling period, the surface of the product becomes almost dried,
                                   as there is insufficient (free) moisture. At this stage, heat energy is continuously supplied
                                   to the products to take out the bound moisture, which results in the product surface
                                   becoming very hard and forming crusts. This crust formation creates an extra obstacle for
                                   the evaporation process from the surface of the products to the environment, and, hence,
                                   the drying rate further decreases. This further reduction of the drying rate can be referred
                                   to as the second falling rate period, as shown in Figure 2 (“D-E”). It should be mentioned
                                   here that the constant rate period is sometimes controlled by external parameters, 5such
 Energies 2022, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                          of 29
                                   as air humidity, air speed, and air temperature. However, the fall rate period is totally
                                   dependent on the products’ characteristics and their internal microstructural features.

                                           Dryingkinetics
                                 Figure2.2.Drying
                                Figure                     asaafunction
                                                  kineticsas                moisturecontent.
                                                                functionofofmoisture content.

                                       Physicsof
                                3.3.Physics           ConvectiveDrying
                                                 ofConvective            Process
                                                                 DryingProcess
                                          Drying is a complex simultaneousheat,
                                         Drying    is a complex simultaneous        mass,and
                                                                               heat,mass,  andmomentum
                                                                                               momentumtransport      process,and
                                                                                                            transportprocess,  and
                                         criticalto
                                ititisiscritical      understandthe
                                                  tounderstand        underlyingphysics
                                                                  theunderlying  physicsin
                                                                                         inorder
                                                                                            orderto describethe
                                                                                                  todescribe     dryingprocesses
                                                                                                              thedrying processes
                                 and develop a PIML-based framework. Therefore, the underlying physics behind the dry-
                                 ing processes are discussed in this section.

                                 3.1. Mass Transport
                                      Mass transport is simply a process of transporting chemical species from one location

[[PAGE 6]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                 5 of 27

                          and develop a PIML-based framework. Therefore, the underlying physics behind the
                          drying processes are discussed in this section.

                          3.1. Mass Transport
                                Mass transport is simply a process of transporting chemical species from one location to
                          another. During drying, moisture migrates from various cellular locations in the products to
                          the surface of the products due to the concentration gradients, and then the surface moisture
                          is migrated to the environment (drying air) through evaporation [23]. Here, the first process
                          can be defined as an internal mass transport process where moisture moves from one place
                          to another inside the products, and the second can be defined as an external mass transport
                          process where the moisture is transported from the product surface to the drying air inside
                          the dryer, as shown in Figure 1. Porous materials, such as food materials, contain multiphase
                          (solid, liquid, and gas) species inside the products [2,24]. The transport characteristics of liquid
                          water and gas species are different, and, therefore, a different subset of physics is required to
                          mathematically express their transport phenomena. Diffusion, convection, and evaporation
                          are the main driving mechanism of internal and external mass transport. These internal and
                          external mass transport processes can be described and mathematically expressed by different
                          subsets of known physics, which are discussed below.

                          3.1.1. Diffusion
                               Diffusion is a molecular mass transfer process where molecules are randomly moved
                          from a higher-concentration area to a lower-concentration region, in which no molecules have
                          a preferred direction. Two different diffusion processes, namely, capillary diffusion and binary
                          diffusion, are used to define the movement of liquid water and gas species, respectively.
                               Capillary diffusion: Capillary diffusion is a mass transfer process mainly due to the
                          capillary action of the liquid. The capillary action is created by the capillary forces. Capillary
                          forces are the molecular attraction between the liquid molecules and the solid surfaces.
                          Moreover, the interfacial pressure difference inside the porous matrix is responsible for
                          raising the capillary actions [25]. For addressing the liquid species transport in a multiphase
                          domain, the capillary diffusion phenomenon is widely used. For modelling the capillary
                          action into small pores in a multiphase porous domain, the Lucas–Washburn equation is
                          well recognised [26]. In this equation, viscous drag and gravity are considered the balancing
                          parameters of the pressure inside a cylindrical capillary [27,28], which can be expressed by
                          the following expression:
                                                                         2γ cos(θ )
                                                                   hc =                                                  (1)
                                                                            rρ g
                          where hc is the capillary height (m), γ is referred to as the surface tension (N/m), θ is the
                                         ◦
                          contact angle ( ), r is the capillary radius (m), ρ is the density of water (kg/m3 ), and g is the
                          gravitational acceleration (m/s2 ).
                               Moreover, the capillary flow in porous media can be expressed by Darcy’s law [14]:

                                                                        k ∂P
                                                                     u=− l                                                 (2)
                                                                        µ ∂x

                          where P is the fluid pressure (Pa), u is the Darcy velocity (m/s), k l is the porous material’s
                          permeability (m2 ), and µ is the dynamic viscosity (Pa·s).
                                Sometimes, the capillary action can be expressed as a result of negative pressure on
                          the liquid [14]; therefore, the mass transfer (mass flux) of liquid can be expressed by the
                          following equation:
                                                          pr., capillary       k ∂( P − pc )
                                                         nl              = −ρl l                                      (3)
                                                                              µl     ∂s
                                 pr.,capillary
                          here, nl         is the mass fluxes of the liquid due to the capillary effects (kg/m2 s), ρl
                          and µl is the density (kg/m3 ) and the dynamic viscosity of liquid (kg/ms), respectively.
                          Moreover, the P indicates the total gas pressure (Pa), pc indicates the liquid phase capillary

[[PAGE 7]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                            6 of 27

                          pressure, and s is the distance (m). Here, the liquid phase permeability (k1 ) (m2 ) can
                          be expressed as kl = k × klr, , where k1r is a dimensionless parameter called the relative
                          permeability. It should be mentioned here that the liquid concentration and the domain
                          temperature are the functions of capillary pressure (pc ). Therefore, Equation (3) can be
                          described by the following expression:

                                              pr., capillary           k l ∂p     k ∂pc ∂cl     k ∂pc ∂T
                                             nl                = −ρl          + ρl l        + ρl l                    (4)
                                                                       µl ∂s      µl ∂cl ∂s     µl ∂T ∂s

                          where T indicates the domain average temperature (K), and cl is the liquid concentration
                          (mol/m3 ).
                                In Equation (4), the mass fluxes due to the gas pressure difference are expressed by
                          the first term on the right-hand side and the mass flux (capillary flux) due to concentration
                          gradient and temperature gradient, respectively, is expressed by the second and third terms
                          of the right-hand side of Equation (4).
                                Chemkhi et al. [29] expressed the capillary pressure by the following equation:
                                                          r
                                                               φ
                                                  pc =           × (0.1212 − 0.000167T ) × J (Ssat )                  (5)
                                                               k
                                                                                                           0.005
                                       J (Ssat ) = 0.364{1 − exp(40 Ssat − 40)} + 0.221(1 − Ssat ) +                  (6)
                                                                                                            Ssat
                          where T is the temperature (K), ϕ indicates the porosity of the products, k is the intrinsic
                          permeability (m2 ), and Ssat is the saturation.
                               Binary Diffusion: Binary diffusion is a mass transfer process of gaseous species (vapour
                          and air). The binary diffusion coefficient plays a vital role in expressing the gas species’
                          movement from one medium to another. For example, considering DBW is a binary diffusion
                          coefficient (m2 /s), the subscript BW indicates that species B is to diffuse through a medium
                          W. Mathematically the DBW can be expressed by the following equation.
                                                                         s             
                                                                    −5      1     1          1           1
                                          DBW = 2.2646 × 10               T    +                  ×                   (7)
                                                                            MB   MW          2
                                                                                            σBW       c Ω DBW

                          where MB and MW are the molecular weight (kg) of species B and species W, respectively,
                          and c is the molar density of the binary mixture (mol/m3 ). Here, binary collision diameter
                          (m) is expressed by σBW , which is inversely proportional to the molecular mass, and
                          is defined as the collision integral for the diffusion process. Likewise, Fuller et al. [30]
                          mathematically expressed the binary diffusion coefficient using the following equation:
                                                                                       0.5
                                                                              Mw + M A
                                                                10−3 T 1.75
                                                                       f      Mw M A
                                                         D AW =                       2                             (8)
                                                                         1           1
                                                               P (∑ v)v3 + (∑ v) a3

                          where MA and Mw indicate the air and water species’ molecular weight (g/mol), respec-
                          tively, P is the external pressure (atm), (∑ v)v and (∑ v) a are the vapor and air atomic
                          diffusion volume, respectively, and Tf is the average temperature between the material
                          surface temperature of and the environment temperature (K).
                               Binary diffusion coefficients can be the function of temperature and can be expressed
                          by the Bolz [31] expression, as given below.

                                          D AW = −2.775 × 10−6 + 4.479 × 10−8 T + 1.656 × 10−6 T 2                    (9)

                          where T is the temperature (K).

[[PAGE 8]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                         7 of 27

                          3.1.2. Convection
                               Convection is one of the dominant mass transfer processes due to fluid motion. Mass
                          transfer due to convection can be expressed by the pressure-driven flow. When a pressure
                          gradient exists in a multiphase porous domain, such as food materials, moisture migrates
                          from the higher-pressure area to the lower-pressure zone. Pressure-driven flow plays a
                          dominant role in case-intensive heating, such as microwave-based heating, cooking or
                          roasting processes. Liquid and gas (air or vapour) inside the pores of the product can be
                          transported by this phenomenon. Per Darcy’s law, pressure-driven flow for gas can be
                          expressed as follows:
                                                              pressure        k g ∂P
                                                            ng         = −ρ g                                  (10)
                                                                              µ g ∂s
                               Pressure-driven flow for a liquid is

                                                                 pressure           k l ∂P
                                                                nl          = −ρl                                (11)
                                                                                    µl ∂s
                                  pressure
                          where n g       is the vapour mass flux due to gas pressure (kg/m2 s), ρ g is the density of
                          the gas (kg/m3 ), µ g is the dynamic viscosity of gas (kg/ms).
                               For the external mass transport due to convection, a convection mass transfer coeffi-
                          cient needs to be considered; this is discussed in Section 3.2.3.

                          3.1.3. Evaporation
                               Evaporation is a process of phase change from liquid to vapour by absorbing heat
                          energy. Evaporation in a porous medium can occur in three different ways, and these
                          are called (i) distributed (equilibrium) evaporation, (ii) the non-equilibrium evaporation
                          process, and (iii) evaporation in the moving interface at the boundary.
                                                                       .
                               The nonequilibrium evaporation rate ( I) can be calculated by the following equation.
                                                            .          Mv             
                                                            I = Ke        Pv, eq − Pv                            (12)
                                                                       RT
                          where Mv is the molecular weight of vapour (kg/mol), Pv is the vapour pressure (Pa),
                          R is the gas constant (kg/mol/K), Ke is the evaporation constant (1/s), and Pv,eq is the
                          equilibrium vapour pressure (Pa) which can be calculated based on the sorption isotherm
                          of a specific product.
                                The evaporation due to the density difference between the equilibrium vapour density
                          and the actual vapour density is proportional to the non-equilibrium evaporation [16] and
                          can be expressed as follows:
                                                              .                   
                                                              I = K p ρv − ρv, eq                               (13)
                          where Kp is the proportionality constant.
                              Here, the equilibrium vapor density ρv,E can be expressed as:

                                                                            aw pv, s Mw
                                                                ρv, E =                                          (14)
                                                                               Rg T

                          where aw is the water activity of saturated porous media, pv,s is the saturation vapor
                          pressure (Pa), Rg is the gas constant (kJ/kmol K), Mw is the water molecular weight
                          (kg/kmol), and T is the domain average temperature (K).

                          3.2. Heat Transfer
                              Likewise, the mass transport, internal heat transfer through conduction, convection,
                          and evaporation and external heat transport through convection and evaporation.

[[PAGE 9]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                              8 of 27

                          3.2.1. Conduction Heat Transfer
                               Conduction is one of the dominant heat transfer processes, whereby heat is transferred
                          from one location to another inside a porous structure (such as food materials) through
                          a cellular solid matrix (such as cell walls or fibres) due to molecular movement. For
                          instance, when adjacent electrons move randomly from atom to atom in a solid matrix
                          due to their energy differences, conduction heat transfer takes place. For mathematical
                          modelling of drying processes, conduction heat transfer can be expressed by the well-
                          known Fourier’s law, which states that the heat transfer rate per unit area through a solid
                          material is proportional to the negative temperature gradient. Equation (15) presents the
                          mathematical expression of Fourier’s law:

                                                                   q = −k th ∆T                                       (15)

                          where q is the vector of heat transfer rate (W/m2 ), k th is the thermal conductivity of the
                          material (W/m/K), and ∆T is the temperature gradient.
                               Conduction heat transfer also can be considered for the gaseous phase, which occurs
                          mainly due to the collisions of gas molecules with one another inside the porous matrix.
                          The rate of heat transfer through conduction in a gas phase strongly depends on the
                          composition of gasses. The conduction heat transfer in a gas phase can be expressed by the
                          Knudsen number. In drying modelling, the conduction heat transfer in the gas phase can
                          be neglected, as this effect is not very significant for predicting drying kinetics.

                          3.2.2. Convection Heat Transfer
                                This is heat transfer through the fluid medium from one place to another due to
                          the mass motion of a fluid, such as air or water. During drying, heat transfer through
                          convection can be internal inside the multiphase porous matrix and external (from drying
                          air to the product surface). The external convection heat transport can be expressed by the
                          following equation:
                                                                  q = h T A∆T                                    (16)
                          where h T is the heat transfer coefficient (W/m2 /K), A is the cross-sectional area, and ∆T is
                          the temperature difference between drying air and the product surface. Here, the calculation
                          of the heat transfer coefficient is one of the great challenges, as the heat transfer coefficient
                          varies based on the product shape and the external flow types and their distribution. The
                          details of the heat transfer coefficient are discussed below.

                          3.2.3. Heat and Mass Transfer Coefficients
                                Heat and mass transfer coefficients play vital role to change the drying kinetics [32].
                          During drying, the fluid (hot air) flows across the drying chamber, which forms a boundary
                          layer thickness around the product surfaces. As the fluid flow distribution varies inside
                          the drying chamber, the flow velocity at different locations of the product surfaces is
                          different. Therefore, the Reynolds number, which is the function of air velocity around the
                          products, varies. The variations in Reynolds numbers around the product mean that heat
                          and mass transfer coefficients around the products are also variable terms, as they are the
                          function of the Reynolds number, as well as the Nusselt number and Sherwood number,
                          respectively. Addressing this spatial distribution of heat and mass transfer coefficients is
                          challenging; therefore, most of the existing drying models in the literature did not consider
                          this important issue. The existing drying models were developed by considering constant
                          heat and mass transfer coefficients.
                                The sample shape and the characteristics of fluid flow alter the heat and mass transfer
                          coefficients of the sample. Here, as an example, a sample calculation procedure of spatial
                          distribution of heat and mass transfer coefficients considering a cylindrical sample geometry
                          is presented. Drying, particularly, food drying is considered as a low Reynolds number
                          problem, as the food materials contain micro to nanopores [14]. In a cylindrical product,
                          the top and bottom surfaces can be considered flat plates, and the side walls should be

[[PAGE 10]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                    9 of 27

                                   considered as a cylinder in crossflow. Figure 3 presents the schematic representation of
                                   fluid flow distribution across the product. The stagnation point, boundary layer, and wake
Energies 2022, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                   10 of 29
                                   formation region around the products can be seen in Figure 3a. Let us assume that the
                                   angle of flow, where θ = 0 at the stagnation point.

                               Figure 3. Fluid flow across a cylindrical product: (a) fluid flow stream with their boundary layer
                               Figure 3. Fluid flow across a cylindrical product: (a) fluid flow stream with their boundary layer
                               formation [33]; (b) angular positions to calculate the local heat transfer coefficient [32].
                               formation [33]; (b) angular positions to calculate the local heat transfer coefficient [32].
                                    According to Bergman et al. [33], at the stagnation point, the local heat and mass
                                    According to Bergman et al. [33], at the stagnation point, the local heat and mass
                               transfer coefficient can be expressed by the following equation:
                               transfer coefficient can be expressed by the following equation:
                                                                            hL
                                                                      
                                                          Nul(θ=00) =hT TL = 1.15
                                                          Nu                     1.15ReRe0.5
                                                                                        D
                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                          D PrPr0.33
                                                                                                    0.33
                                                                                                                            (17)
                                                                                                                            (17)
                                                             l
                                                                         k ak a

                               where hℎT isisthe
                                              theheat              coefficient(W/m
                                                   heattransfer
                                                         transfercoefficient    (W/m2 2/K),
                                                                                        /K), ReD    is the dimensionless number
                                                                                                 D is

                               (Reynolds   number),PrPris the
                               (Reynolds number),              Prandtl
                                                           is the       number,
                                                                    Prandtl  number,      kaairisthermal
                                                                                 k a is the        the airconductivity (W/m/K),
                                                                                                            thermal conductivity
                               and L is the characteristic length (m). If the value of θ is changed, then the local Nul is
                               (W/m/K), and L is the characteristic length      (m). If the value of  is changed, then the
                               also changed. For instance, if the θ = 80◦ , then the local Nul be expressed by the following
                               local         also changed. For instance, if the  = 80°, then the local Nul be expressed
                                     Nul is[33].
                               expression
                               by the following expression                  h L
                                                          Nul [33].
                                                              (θ = 80) = T = 0.75 ReD 0.5 Pr0.33                            (18)
                                                                             ka
                                                                             hL
                                                       transfer
                                   Similarly, the mass Nu      
                                                          l   80     
                                                                coefficient    0.75 ReD 0.5 Prusing
                                                                          T can be calculated   0.33                   of
                                                                                                     the relationship(18)
                                                                         ka
                               Sherwood number (Shl ), as given below [33].

                                                                      hm L can be calculated
                                   Similarly, the mass transfer coefficient                      using the relationship of
                                                        Shl (θ = 0) =       = 1.15ReD 0.5 Sc0.33                      (19)
                               Sherwood number ( Shl ), as given belowD[33].
                                                                         v

                               where hm is the air mass transfer coefficient
                                                                           hm(m/s),
                                                                              L      Dv is the binary (gas) diffusivity (m2 /s),
                                                           Sh   
                               and Sc indicates the Schmidtl number.0           1.15   ReD 0.5 Sc0.33                   (19)
                                    For the top and bottom surface as a flatDvplate, the following expression can be used for
                                      hm is the
                               calculating
                               where        the heat and mass
                                                air mass       transfer
                                                         transfer       coefficients
                                                                              (m/s), [33].
                                                                  coefficient         Dv is the binary (gas) diffusivity (m2/s),
                               and Sc indicates the Schmidt number. 0.5 0.33
                                                         Nu f = 0.333 Rex Pr               Pr ≥ 0.6                  (20)
                                    For the top and bottom surface as a flat plate, the following expression can be used
                                                             hm L transfer coefficients
                               for calculating the heat and mass                        [33].
                                                     Sh f =       = 0.333Rex 0.5 Sc0.33       Sc ≥ 0.6               (21)
                                                              Dv
                                                     Nu f  0.333    Rex 0.5 Pr 0.33           Pr  0.6              (20)
                                                    Nu f = 0.0296 Rex 4/5 Pr1/3           0.6 ≤ Pr ≥ 60              (22)
                                                             h L
                                                Sh f =Sh f  = 0.0296Re
                                                       hm L m  0.333
                                                                                                    Sc≥0.6
                                                                                 0.5   0.33
                                                                          4/5Rex1/3 Sc
                                                                        x     Sc              0.6 ≤Sc    3000               (21)
                                                                                                                            (23)
                                                        Dv Dv
                               where Rex is the Reynolds number, Nu    4 / 5f and1/ 3Sh f are Nusselt number and Sherwood
                                                Nu at
                               number, respectively, f  0.0296
                                                       the top andRe
                                                                   bottom
                                                                     x       Prsurfaces.       0.6  Pr  60          (22)

                                                        hm L
                                               Sh f          0.0296 Rex 4 / 5 Sc1/ 3         0.6  Sc  3000              (23)
                                                         Dv

[[PAGE 11]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                             10 of 27

                          4. Current Status of Drying Modelling
                               Convective drying is one of the most ancient processes of drying. To understand the
                          drying processes, extensive modelling has been conducted over the last few decades, and
                          huge improvements and advancements have been made. The existing drying models can
                          be broadly classified based on their modelling approaches, namely, traditional modelling
                          approaches and data-driven (machine-learning-based models) modelling approaches. The
                          traditional modelling includes empirical/semi-empirical modelling and physics-based
                          modelling. The data-driven modelling includes purely machine-learning-based modelling
                          and physics-informed machine-learning-based modelling. The current status of these
                          existing drying modelling strategies is discussed below.

                          4.1. The Traditional Drying Models
                          4.1.1. Empirical/Semi-Empirical Drying Modelling
                                Empirical modelling was the first attempt at drying modelling strategies, and, there-
                          fore, these modelling strategies are categorised as first-generation models. These models
                          were developed entirely based on experimental data and the statistical curve-fitting pro-
                          cesses. As a result, they became entirely product- and processes-dependent. Some of the
                          well-known models were used to fit the experimental data. The well-known empirical mod-
                          els include the Page model [34], the Newton or Lews model [35], the Henderson and Pabis
                          model [36], the Wang and Sing model [37], and various modified Page models. The Lewis
                          model is a slightly updated model that is based on Newton’s law of cooling. Various studies
                          have been conducted to observe the performance of these different models during drying.
                          Chayjan et al. [38] investigated the drying kinetics of garlic using fluidised bed drying
                          processes. They developed different empirical models using the well-known drying models.
                          It was observed that the Page model is the best at predicting drying kinetics in terms of
                          accuracy when compared to the other models. Similar research has been reported in many
                          different literatures for various fruits and vegetables, such as apricots [39], bananas [40],
                          potatoes [41], tomatoes and onions [42], and pistachios [43]. The main limitation of these
                          models is limited applicability; for example, the model that is developed for apricots cannot
                          be used for bananas. This is mainly due to the entire model being based on experimental
                          data that are product- and process-condition-dependent.
                                The aforementioned problems of the empirical model have encouraged researchers to
                          move towards a physics-based model. A little improvement has been made by developing
                          second-generation models, which are called semi-empirical models. This model is developed
                          based on the reaction kinetics theory, where first-order reaction kinetics with activation energy
                          is used to model the moisture evaporation rate. Zero-order kinetics is used to describe the
                          condensation processes. It was reported that the second category model (reaction kinetic
                          model) is able to predict the moisture and temperature profile during drying with better
                          physics-based understanding [6]. However, these types of models are also dependent on
                          the products and process conditions, for instance, a certain range of drying temperature and
                          drying air velocity. These modelling approaches are unable to account for the actual physics
                          of the drying process that is discussed in Section 3 and, therefore, cannot provide fundamental
                          insights into drying processes. To overcome these limitations of empirical/semi-empirical
                          models, purely physics-based modelling has been introduced.

                          4.1.2. Physics-Based Drying Models
                               Physics-based modelling is the most advanced type of drying model and is developed
                          based on actual drying phenomena. It accounts for all the fundamental laws of physics,
                          such as the conservation of mass, momentum, and energy; Navier–Stokes equations for
                          fluid flow; and Newton’s laws of motion [44]. The physics-based model can provide
                          a fundamental understanding of drying processes, for instance, the spatial distribution
                          of moisture and temperature distribution at any instantaneous drying condition can be
                          predicted by a physics-based drying model. However, the development of the purely
                          physics-based model for drying is a challenging and very complex process, as the coupling

[[PAGE 12]]
for fluid flow; and Newton’s laws of motion [44]. The physics-based model can provide a
                            fundamental understanding of drying processes, for instance, the spatial distribution of
Energies 2022, 15, 9347     moisture and temperature distribution at any instantaneous drying condition can be11pre-              of 27

                            dicted by a physics-based drying model. However, the development of the purely phys-
                            ics-based model for drying is a challenging and very complex process, as the coupling of
                            multiphysics
                             of multiphysics  (discussed  in in
                                                  (discussed Section  3) 3)
                                                                Section     intensely
                                                                         is is intenselydifficult
                                                                                          difficultand
                                                                                                     andrigorous
                                                                                                          rigorouswork.
                                                                                                                    work.Therefore,
                                                                                                                           Therefore,
                             manysimplified
                            many                   assumptions are
                                     simplifiedassumptions           sometimes made
                                                                 are sometimes     made to    reduce the
                                                                                          to reduce        computational complex-
                                                                                                      the computational    complexi-
                            ities of physics-based
                             ties of  physics-based modelling.       For example,
                                                        modelling. For   example, porous        media, such
                                                                                      porous media,     such as
                                                                                                              as food  materialsare
                                                                                                                  food materials   are
                             multiscalein
                            multiscale         natureand
                                            innature   andcontain
                                                            containmacroscale
                                                                     macroscale(tissue
                                                                                   (tissuescale)    andmicroscale
                                                                                            scale)and                 (cellularscale)
                                                                                                         microscale(cellular    scale)
                             (Figure 4).
                            (Figure        For simplicity,
                                       4). For              physics-basedmodels
                                                simplicity, physics-based    modelsare aresometimes      developedonly
                                                                                           sometimesdeveloped              consider-
                                                                                                                     onlyconsidering
                            ing a single scale and sometimes both scales. The details of the
                             a single   scale   and  sometimes   both  scales.   The   details  of the macroscale    and multiscale
                                                                                                                     and   multiscale
                             modelsare
                            models           discussed below.
                                       arediscussed     below.

                                                                               Macroscale
                                                                                                                 Gas

                                                                                                                        Liquid
                                                                                                                        Solid

            Intercellular
             space
            Intracellular
           Intracellul
          zxbvx
           ar     spaces
            spaces
             Transport
                Transport

                                Microscale

                            Figure 4. Schematic representation of microstructural elements of food materials.
                             Figure 4. Schematic representation of microstructural elements of food materials.

                             Macroscale(Tissue
                            Macroscale     (TissueScale)
                                                    Scale)Modelling
                                                            Modelling
                                   Themacroscale
                                  The  macroscale drying       models are
                                                      drying models      are the  modelsthat
                                                                              the models          aredeveloped
                                                                                            thatare    developedbasedbasedon     thephysics-
                                                                                                                             onthe    phys-
                            ics-based   transport
                             based transport        phenomena
                                                phenomena               the tissue
                                                                    at tissue
                                                                at the          scalescale  (Figure
                                                                                       (Figure         4, right-hand
                                                                                                 4, right-hand     side).side).  The mac-
                                                                                                                          The macroscale
                             modelsmodels
                            roscale   are alsoare  also simplified
                                                simplified             considering
                                                             considering               the existence
                                                                             the existence              of the multispecies
                                                                                             of the multispecies      inside theinside   the
                                                                                                                                  products.
                            products.   Porous
                             Porous media,        media,
                                               such        such
                                                     as food       as food contain
                                                               materials,     materials,   contain
                                                                                       multiple       multiple
                                                                                                  species:        species:
                                                                                                             liquid   water,liquid   water,
                                                                                                                              gas (mixture
                            gas  (mixture
                             of water  vapourof water   vapour
                                                 and air),        and air),
                                                            and solid.         andmultiple
                                                                           These    solid. These
                                                                                             species multiple    speciesrole
                                                                                                       play a greater      playinaheat
                                                                                                                                    greater
                                                                                                                                         and
                             massintransfer
                            role    heat and    mass drying.
                                              during   transferForduring    drying.
                                                                      simplicity,     For simplicity,
                                                                                   many    physics-based many     physics-based
                                                                                                              drying   models have  drying
                                                                                                                                        been
                            models
                             developed       been
                                      haveonly      developedsingle-species
                                                 considering       only considering       single-species
                                                                                    (liquid                            water)
                                                                                                             (liquidThis
                                                                                             water) transport.              typetransport.
                                                                                                                                  of model
                            This  type of to
                             is referred   model
                                              as a is referred to as
                                                    single-phase        a single-phase
                                                                     model.               model. In
                                                                                In single-phase        single-phase
                                                                                                     modelling,         modelling,
                                                                                                                     Fickian           Fick-is
                                                                                                                               diffusion
                            ian diffusion is considered for mass transfer, and Fourier’s law of conduction is consid-
                             considered    for  mass   transfer,  and    Fourier’s   law  of  conduction      is considered     as a  driver
                            ered  as atransfer.
                             of heat   driver of Based     on thisBased
                                                   heat transfer.            on this
                                                                      concept,    manyconcept,   many single-phase
                                                                                          single-phase      drying models dryinghavemodels
                                                                                                                                        been
                            have   been developed
                             developed                 for drying
                                          for drying food           food [7,13,45,46],
                                                             [7,13,45,46],   wood [40,47],    and [40,47],
                                                                                           wood               and
                                                                                                    brick [48].     brick [48].
                                                                                                                 Although        Although
                                                                                                                              these models
                            these  models can
                             can effectively     effectively
                                               predict  dryingpredict
                                                                kinetics,drying   kinetics,
                                                                            they are   unablethey   are unableprovide
                                                                                               to separately      to separately    provide
                                                                                                                           information    on
                             vapour flux on
                            information     andvapour    flux and
                                                 liquid water        liquid
                                                                 fluxes,      water
                                                                           which   arefluxes,  which
                                                                                        important    forare  importantdrying
                                                                                                          optimising      for optimising
                                                                                                                                  processes
                            drying                and addressing
                                     processes quality
                             and addressing                attributes.quality   attributes. Theofdevelopment
                                                                           The development            a physics-based of a physics-based
                                                                                                                            drying model
                            drying model considering multispecies transport is the most effective approach; therefore,
                             considering   multispecies    transport    is the most   effective  approach;     therefore,  many    attempts
                            many attempts have been made [49].
                             have  been   made   [49].
                                   Mathematically describing the multiphase transport phenomena in porous media
                             modelling is a complex task, as the porous media contains different irregularly shaped
                             pore spaces inside the products. For multiphase transport modelling, capillary diffusion
                             and binary diffusion are considered for liquid and vapour mass transport processes (as
                             discussed in Section 3.1.1), and conduction, convection, and phase change are considered

[[PAGE 13]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                           12 of 27

                          for the heat transfer process. As the capillary pressure drives the capillary diffusion, proper
                          estimation of capillary pressure is important. Depending on the level of saturation of the
                          products, the capillary pressure varies from product to product. For example, the capillary
                          pressure of a fully unsaturated product is much higher than that of partially saturated
                          products [14], and, therefore, careful thinking is required to determine whether the product
                          is fully saturated, partially saturated, or unsaturated. The multiphase transport phenom-
                          ena were first described by the phenomenological model. Luikov [50] proposed three
                          parallel partial derivative equations, including different constants, to phenomenologically
                          describe the multiphase transport phenomena. In this model, convective flow is considered
                          for gas transport, and capillary flow is considered for liquid transport. However, gas
                          transport needs to be considered as a binary diffusion process, and liquid water should
                          be considered as a bulk convective (pressure-driven) flow. Moreover, as the phenomeno-
                          logical model cannot describe the actual physics, Luikov [50] models sometimes can be
                          considered semi-empirical models [14]. To address these problems, a purely physics-based
                          multiphase transport was proposed by Whitaker [51]. The transport of different species
                          (liquid, gas, and solid) in a porous structure is clearly described based on the mechanistic
                          approach. Whitaker [51] proposed the well-known volume averaging method to account
                          for the different phases at the microscale as a representative average of the volume at
                          the macroscale. Although this approach is a great transition from the phenomenological
                          model to the mechanistic approach for multiphase transport modelling, the influences of
                          structural heterogeneity on transport phenomena are ignored. Based on Whitaker [51]
                          volume averaging theory, many researchers attempted to develop a multiphase model for
                          food drying [14,15,24,52], ceramic drying [53], and wood drying [54–56]. Although these
                          models are a very effective addition to drying research for accurately predicting drying
                          kinetics and optimising drying processes, their inability to provide microscale transport
                          phenomena is their major limitation. To address this limitation of the existing physics-based
                          drying model, multiscale modelling has been introduced, as discussed below.

                          Multiscale Modelling
                               Multiscale modelling is the most advanced physics-based drying model that accounts
                          for both microscale and macroscale transport phenomena. The structure of porous food is
                          mostly heterogeneous and composed of various cellular compartments [57,58], as shown
                          in Figure 4. Different cellular environments, such as intercellular, intracellular, and cell
                          wall environments, contain various proportions of water. For instance, the water contents
                          of apple are 88%, 8.8%, and 2.2% intracellular water (loosely bound), intercellular water
                          (free), and cell wall water (strongly bound), respectively [22]. The transport process of
                          different types of cellular water is different, for instance, intracellular water migrates from
                          intracellular spaces to the intercellular species through periodic cell rupture during drying
                          at higher temperatures (more than 50 ◦ C). Moreover, different cells have their unique
                          cellular properties that govern the entire drying process from the micro- to the macroscale.
                          Therefore, it is extraordinarily important to account for these microscale properties and the
                          transport phenomena to accurately predict drying kinetics and optimise drying processes.
                          Multiscale modelling can capture the transport phenomena at both scales and, therefore,
                          reduces the model assumption. This novel approach allows us to understand the relation
                          between the local models at different scales of resolution and formulate the models to design
                          a computational algorithm. It has been widely used in many research fields, including
                          material science, porous media modelling, biological material analysis, understanding of
                          molecular dynamics, and fracture mechanics analysis. For drying applications, multiscale
                          modelling is still an attractive approach, although few attempts have been made for food
                          drying [59,60], wood drying [61–63], concrete drying [64] and postharvest processing of
                          food materials [65,66]. In multiscale modelling, the local scale (microscale) information is
                          accounted and scaled up to the global (tissue) scale. This can be done through a well-known
                          concurrent approach or a simplified homogenisation approach. The details of the multiscale
                          modelling strategies can be found in various places in the literature [59,67].

[[PAGE 14]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                           13 of 27

                               Although the aforementioned physics-based models comprehensively provide a
                          physics-related understanding of the drying process, the predictions from traditional
                          computational approaches, such as finite element analysis and mesh-free numerical ap-
                          proaches, are limited, mainly due to the solver limitations. Moreover, these computational
                          approaches are challenged by complex geometrical structures and nonlinear drying pro-
                          cesses. The challenges continue due to unknown physics and parameter variations with
                          the nonlinear process and temperature variations [17]. In such cases, data-driven models
                          have been a critical choice due to their inherent capabilities of correlating the outputs with
                          inputs with no known physics and related parameters.

                          4.2. Data-Driven Drying Modelling
                               Data-driven modelling strategies are the process of developing models based on
                          data and statistical learning. Data-driven modelling can be divided into two categories:
                          purely data-driven modelling, known as machine-learning-based modelling, and physics-
                          informed machine-learning-based (ML) modelling, which is discussed below.

                          4.2.1. Machine-Learning-Based Modelling
                                The industrial revolution (Industry 4.0) and advances in technology, such as sensors,
                          computing resources, and cloud computing platforms have created massive datasets avail-
                          able in various applications [68]. As a result, novel methods and modelling techniques have
                          been revealed based on past experiences. The data have been combined with statistical,
                          computational, mathematical, and engineering theories to predict future behaviours [69].
                          Modelling tools, such as machine learning have successfully adapted technologies in
                          various information-technology-based fields [69–72]. Therefore, researchers have been
                          interested in utilising ML approaches in various engineering and science developments.
                                In conventional data-driven ML algorithms, the raw data needed to be carefully extracted
                          and processed before being fed as inputs to ML to identify patterns effectively. Therefore,
                          such conventional machine learning does not perform well in real-time applications with
                          raw data due to the impossibility of real-time data processing. In such circumstances, deep
                          neural networks (DNN) can be employed to discover the features automatically from raw data
                          with no human interactions [73]. Therefore, DNNs have been successfully involved in many
                          real-world applications, such as self-driving automobiles [74–76], speech recognition and
                          processing [77–80], image recognition and processing [81–83], healthcare [84–86], character
                          recognition [87–90], and many more [71,91].
                                Pure data-driven machine learning models have also been developed in drying appli-
                          cations [92–94] to predict mostly macroscale moisture content [95–97], drying rate [98,99],
                          mass loss [97,100], and morphological characteristics [101–103]. Das et al. [104] developed
                          a machine-learning model to predict mass transfer based on experimental data. Hernández-
                          Pérez et al. [105] developed an artificial neural network predictive model for heat and
                          mass transfer. A detailed understanding of the status of existing machine-learning-based
                          models and their limitations and challenges can be found in recently published review
                          papers [44,93]. The purely data-driven models, particularly neural network-based mod-
                          els (sometimes referred as black-box models) completely rely on the information of the
                          dataset. In the case of noisy, ill-posed or insufficient data, the predictions may not be accu-
                          rate. Furthermore, purely data-driven predictions do not consider any physical meaning.
                          Against this background, Raissi et al. [20] proposed a novel concept, PIML, to combine
                          physics-based models with data-driven modelling.

                          4.2.2. PIML-Based Modelling
                               PIML is a novel concept that encodes physics-based models defined with differential
                          equations with the information extracted from data. The integration is carried out through
                          the loss function. The residual losses of the physics-based conditions (boundary conditions
                          and/or initial conditions) and governing equations are coupled to the typical supervised
                          neural network loss, as shown in Figure 5.

[[PAGE 15]]
4.2.2. PIML-Based Modelling
                               PIML is a novel concept that encodes physics-based models defined with differential
                          equations with the information extracted from data. The integration is carried out through
                          the loss function. The residual losses of the physics-based conditions (boundary condi-
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                        14 of 27
                          tions and/or initial conditions) and governing equations are coupled to the typical super-
                          vised neural network loss, as shown in Figure 5.

                          Figure 5. Schematic representation of PIML framework (here t is the drying time, x and y is the
                           Figure 5. Schematic representation of PIML framework (here     t is the drying time, x and y is the two
                          two dimensional axis, and C is liquid conentation (mol/m   3)).
                           dimensional axis, and C is liquid conentation (mol/m3 )).

                                 Weight and
                                 Weight    and bias    of the
                                                 bias of   the neural     network are
                                                                 neural network             optimised through
                                                                                       are optimised      throughiterative        processesuntil
                                                                                                                       iterativeprocesses       un-
                           the residuals of the total loss function meet convergence requirements. The residual of
                          til the  residuals    of the  total   loss  function     meet   convergence        requirements.       The  residual    of
                           those conditions
                          those   conditions and and equations
                                                       equationsare        minimal,which
                                                                      areminimal,         which   means
                                                                                                means    thethe  predictions
                                                                                                               predictions        closely
                                                                                                                              closely      satisfy
                                                                                                                                        satisfy  the
                          the
                           givengiven   physics
                                   physics          relationships
                                              relationships      alongalong
                                                                         with thewithdatathe[18].    [18]. Derivatives
                                                                                              dataDerivatives                of physics-based
                                                                                                                    of physics-based       models
                          models     integrated     with     PIML    are   calculated      with   no   mesh     or  no
                           integrated with PIML are calculated with no mesh or no particle interactions. Therefore, no   particle   interactions.
                          Therefore,    no domain errors
                           domain discretisation                  or other errors
                                                         discretisation               or other
                                                                             solver-based         solver-based
                                                                                               limitations           limitations
                                                                                                               are imposed          are imposed
                                                                                                                                in PIML    calcula-
                          in  PIML    calculations.     For   moving     boundaries        or  domains,      PIML
                           tions. For moving boundaries or domains, PIML does not demand complex computational        does  not   demand      com-
                          plex   computational       advancement         requirements        as  traditional    computational
                           advancement requirements as traditional computational approaches do [106]. In addition,                   approaches
                          do   [106]. In
                           inherent      addition,
                                      neural    networkinherent     neuralcan
                                                            capabilities      network                withcan
                                                                                          capabilities
                                                                                  be integrated                 be integrated
                                                                                                             physics-based         with solutions
                                                                                                                                         physics-
                                                                                                                                model
                          based             solutions
                                   model most
                           to overcome                        overcome of
                                                   of thetolimitations       most    of the limitations
                                                                                traditional    computational  of traditional
                                                                                                                    approaches   computational
                                                                                                                                    [17,107,108].
                          approaches      [17,107,108].
                                 The possibilities       of extracting information from both real multi-fidelity data and
                                 The  possibilities
                           integrated physics bring     of  extracting
                                                               promising  information
                                                                              capabilities  from   both real
                                                                                                of PIML      for multi-fidelity     data and in-
                                                                                                                 prediction improvements,
                           especially when the available data is not sufficient [109,110]. In such cases, if the dataes-
                          tegrated    physics    bring    promising      capabilities      of  PIML    for   prediction    improvements,           is
                          pecially   when the
                           not sufficient,    knownavailable
                                                         physics data  is not sufficient
                                                                    provides      additional  [109,110].
                                                                                                 informationIn such    cases, if the
                                                                                                                   to enhance     the data   is not
                                                                                                                                       prediction
                          sufficient,   known
                           accuracy [18].          physics
                                              In the           provides
                                                      food-drying           additional
                                                                        context,           information toetenhance
                                                                                    Batuwatta-Gamage                        the prediction
                                                                                                                   al. [17] developed           ac-
                                                                                                                                          a PIML-
                          curacy    [18]. Intothe
                           based model             food-drying
                                               enhance               context,
                                                            prediction           Batuwatta-Gamage
                                                                          capabilities     in microscale et     al. [17] developed
                                                                                                              variations   during drying.a PIML-The
                          based    model of
                           combination          enhance
                                             todata           prediction
                                                      with related           capabilities
                                                                       physics    equations   inand
                                                                                                  microscale
                                                                                                      conditions variations
                                                                                                                      allows the during   drying.
                                                                                                                                   framework      to
                          The   combination
                           discover   unknown        data with related
                                                 of parameters                physics equationsasand
                                                                     (i.e., parameterisation),            wellconditions
                                                                                                                 as unknown  allows   the frame-
                                                                                                                                  physics    based
                          work
                           on realtoobservational
                                     discover unknown           parameters
                                                       data [111].     Raissi et(i.e.,  parameterisation),
                                                                                   al. [19] demonstrated the     as capabilities
                                                                                                                      well as unknown       phys-
                                                                                                                                     of extracting
                          ics          on realinformation
                               basedphysics
                           hidden                observational       data
                                                                  from       [111]. Raissi data
                                                                         observational         et al.(i.e.,  demonstrated
                                                                                                      [19] real   images). Inthe     capabilities
                                                                                                                                  particular,   the
                          of  extracting
                          pressure     andhidden
                                              velocityphysics      information
                                                          fields have                from observational
                                                                          been extracted         through passive data (i.e.,
                                                                                                                         media real  images). In
                                                                                                                                  concentration
                          with the aidthe
                          particular,      of pressure
                                               Navier–Stokesand velocity
                                                                    equations. fields
                                                                                   This have    beendemonstrates
                                                                                          further      extracted through how thispassive
                                                                                                                                    robustmedia
                                                                                                                                             PIML
                          concentration
                           framework can      with   the aid to
                                                be utilised         Navier–Stokes
                                                                 ofinvestigate            equations.
                                                                                    variations           Thiswhere
                                                                                                  for cases     furtherdirect
                                                                                                                           demonstrates
                                                                                                                                 measurements  how
                           are simply not possible [18]. Therefore, there is a huge potential in employing PIML for
                           investigating heat and mass transfer in micro and macroscale food-drying applications to
                           discover unknown parameters and their variations with continuous phase changes.
                                 Moreover, PIML can be used to solve standard forward problems through physics-
                           based models with no given experimental or labelled data. This approach is different to
                           traditional computational frameworks, as PIML calculates derivatives through automatic
                           differentiation, which involves neither mesh, as in mesh-based approaches (finite element
                           analysis (FEA)), nor particles, as in mesh-free numerical approaches. Therefore, PIML
                           can be an alternative approach to the traditional computational approaches where they
                           struggle. For instance, it can extract additional information when scattered data is avail-

[[PAGE 16]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                            15 of 27

                          able and conditions are ill-posed [20,106,112,113]. Cai et al. [107] and Blechschmidt and
                          Ernst [108] showed such substantial capabilities in heat transfer and high-dimensional
                          problems, respectively. Even though computational efficiency and the accuracy of the
                          current generation of PIML for solving forward direct problems cannot be yet compared to
                          traditional computational approaches [112], PIML can solve inverse problems identically to
                          forward problems, and this demands neither additional computing nor additional coding
                          efforts [112–114]. Jagtap et al. [113] demonstrated the capability to solve supersonic flow
                          inverse problems using PIML for possible cases where traditional methods are struggling.
                          Lin et al. [115] employed PIML with a high-fidelity mechanistic capsule model to extract
                          shear elasticity and membrane viscosity of microcapsules accurately through inverse mod-
                          elling. Ongie et al. [116] explored the solution of different varieties of inverse problems
                          using images with PIML. Overall, PIML has proven capabilities and is becoming popular
                          in inverse science and engineering applications [106].

                          Applications of PIML for Heat and Mass Transfer Analyses
                                PIML has successfully been used to solve heat and mass transfer problems in various
                          engineering applications. He et al. [117] solved direct forward non-homogeneous heat
                          conduction problems and indirect inverse problems for wood and steel structures. In doing
                          so, they demonstrated PIML’s capability of solving heat transfer problems, in a similar way
                          to FEA approaches. Cai et al. [107] demonstrated the capabilities of PIML to solve realistic
                          convection heat transfer problems in power electronics with ill-posed conditions that
                          cannot be simply tackled with traditional computational approaches. The authors claimed
                          that PIML has great potential to minimise the uncertainties between computational and
                          experimental approaches in heat transfer. Laubscher [118] illustrated its ability to integrate
                          inherent neural network capabilities to solve PDEs in heat transfer problems separately and
                          by surrogating to enhance prediction accuracy. Niaki et al. [119] studied the exothermic
                          heat transfer and curing process of a composite tool using the PIML surrogate model
                          and explained the possibility of utilising transfer learning to reduce the computational
                          cost significantly. Laubscher and Rousseau [120] incorporated conservation laws (mass,
                          momentum, and energy) into the PIML loss function to investigate incompressible laminar
                          flows for steady and transient conditions. Zhang and Al Kobaisi [121] studied how to solve
                          difficult anisotropic diffusion cases through multiple PIMLs by combining loss functions.

                          Applications of PIML for Soft Biological Materials Modelling
                               PIML’s capabilities have already been incorporated into various soft biological tissues,
                          even though it is not yet commonly employed in food tissue investigations. Liuet al. [122]
                          developed a hierarchical learning approach with a PIML model to determine the mechanical
                          properties of thoracic aortic aneurysm tissues. Taghizadeh et al. [123] proposed a novel
                          upscaling process to investigate the transport characteristics of nonlinear brain and liver
                          tissues. Moreover, PIML has been successfully employed in biomedical applications for
                          blood flow analysis [124].

                          Applications of PIML for Food Drying Applications
                               As the very first approach, Batuwatta-Gamage et al. [17] comprehensively developed a
                          PIML-based surrogate model to investigate cellular-level moisture concentration variations
                          coupled with shrinkage effects. Two PIML models were developed for moisture concentration
                          and shrinkage effects. For the first, the convective mass transfer at the cell wall boundary
                          was coupled with Fickian diffusion for an apple cell considering a 2D spatiotemporal domain.
                          Through the developed PIML model for moisture concentration, the authors showed that
                          prediction accuracy can be significantly increased when the dataset is not sufficient to extract
                          an interpretable solution through pure data-driven approaches. This further illustrates the
                          capabilities of PIML to enhance prediction accuracies for unknown datasets, minimising
                          overfitting. In particular, the authors suggested using PIML models for microscale analyses
                          of plant-based food drying where sufficient data acquisition is not readily achievable. The

[[PAGE 17]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                          16 of 27

                          second PIML model developed by Batuwatta-Gamage et al. [17] demonstrates the possibility
                          of encoding derived physics relationships to navigate predictions toward realistic values. The
                          shrinkage was described by the following expression:

                                                                ∂M         ∂A
                                                                    = Khρw                                          (24)
                                                                 ∂t        ∂t
                          where M is the mass loss, t is the drying time, A is the area shrinkage, K is an arbitrary
                          constant, h is the cylindrical cell height, and ρw is the moisture density.
                               Through investigation of this second PIML, the authors demonstrated the possibility of
                          employing developed physics equations to build an accurate correlation between accurately
                          measured data with indirectly calculated data. In this way, the PIML model was successfully
                          employed to enhance the shrinkage predictions from a noisy dataset. Finally, moisture
                          concentration and shrinkage prediction were coupled through surrogate modelling with
                          the aid of inherent machine learning capabilities.
                               Therefore, PIML frameworks with inherent machine learning capabilities do have
                          the potential to leverage heat and mass transfer analysis on the macro- and microscale
                          during drying. As there are no domain discretisation errors in PIML modelling, it will
                          essentially be advantageous for investigating nonlinear variations of parameters through
                          inverse modelling with observational data.

                          5. PIML-Based Modelling Strategies for Drying Applications
                                 To gain a better understanding of developing PIML, the steps for encoding mass
                          transfer related physics into DNN are described here [17]. To understand PIML strategies,
                          it is first necessary to understand the pure DNN model and then the physics encoded PIML,
                          both of which are discussed below.

                          5.1. Purely Data-Driven DNN Modelling
                               Most PIML models are based on feed-forward neural networks with backpropagation.
                          This consists of multiple layers, including the input layer (set of input variables, called
                          independent variables), the output layers (dependent variables), and the hidden layers
                          between the input and output layers. In a supervised training algorithm with known
                          data, the DNN is trained iteratively to minimise the loss function. Loss is the difference
                          between the ground truth (known value) and the predicted value. This difference can
                          be mathematically defined in a variety of ways (e.g., mean squared error (MSE), mean
                          absolute error (MAE), root mean squared error (RMSE) based on the performance and the
                          application [125]:
                                                                      1 n         2
                                                         MSEDNN = ∑ c gt − ĉ p                                  (25)
                                                                      n i =1
                          where c gt is the known ground truth moisture concentration values, c p is the predicted
                          moisture concentration values, and n is the spatiotemporal domain size. The aim of the
                          pure ddata-driven DNN model is to train the neural network parameters (θ := (W, b)) to
                          minimise the loss function (MSEDNN ), so the DNN training completely relies on the dataset
                          used for training. Better accuracy can be expected if sufficient datasets are available.

                          5.2. Physics-Encoded PIML MODEL
                               In the PIML framework, the additional loss terms from physics are coupled with
                          the loss function defined in Equation (26). For illustration, MSE of the residuals of Fick’s
                          diffusion governing law, boundary condition, and initial conditions for mass transfer model
                          during drying can be encoded to the DNN by the following expressions.
                               The residual of the governing equation (Fick’s second law of diffusion) is as follows:

                                                                  1 n ∂c
                                                                                   
                                                      MSERes,Eqn = ∑       − ∇ D ∇c                                 (26)
                                                                  n i=1 ∂t

[[PAGE 18]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                                17 of 27

                                          The residual of the boundary condition (convective mass transfer at the boundary)
                                     can be written as follows:

                                                                                 1 n
                                                                                 n i∑
                                                                  MSERes,BC =          ( D ∇c|n − hm (c − c air ))                        (27)
                                                                                    =1

                                         The residual of the initial condition (moisture content at the fresh condition) can be
                                     expressed as follows:
                                                                                  1 n
                                                                      MSERes,IC = ∑ (c − c0 )                              (28)
                                                                                  n i =1
                                     where c is moisture concentration, D is diffusivity, t is drying time, hm is the mass transfer
                                     coefficient, and c air and c0 are moisture concentration of the air and initial state, respectively.
                                          In order to develop the PIML for mass transfer during drying, the residual loss terms
                                     from the physics conditions discussed above are required to couple with the pure data-
                                     driven DNN loss function.

                                                       MSETotal = MSEDNN + MSERes,Eqn + MSERes,BC + MSERes,IC                             (29)

                                                  2
                               "                                                                                        #
                                    n                  n                   n                               n
                           1                                  ∂c
                MSETotal =
                           n       ∑ cgt − ĉ p        +∑
                                                              ∂t
                                                                 − ∇ D ∇c + ∑ ( D ∇c|n − hm (c − c air )) + ∑ (c − c0 )                   (30)
                                   i =1                i =1                 i =1                            i =1
   Energies 2022, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                            19 of 29
                                           The schematic representation of PIML with mass-transfer-related physics during drying
                                     is illustrated in Figure 6. Now, the neural network parameters (θ := (W, b)) are trained
                                     iteratively to minimise the total loss function (MSETotal ). Therefore, the predictions from the
                                       source code development steps for solid mechanics problems. Both of them used Python
                                     well-trained model obey the dataset, as well as embedded physics equations and conditions.
                                       and provided source code in the GitHub open-source community.

                                      Figure 6. Schematic representation of PIML for mass transfer modelling during drying.
                                     Figure 6. Schematic representation of PIML for mass transfer modelling during drying.
                                       6. Conjugation of Airflow in the Drying Model
                                           Even though both the Python and MATLAB programming languages can be success-
                                            The conjugation
                                     fully used                 of airflow
                                                  to develop PIML     models,distribution
                                                                                 Python has across  the dryer
                                                                                                received        and around
                                                                                                          considerable        the products
                                                                                                                          demand    due to the
                                       needs  to be taken  into consideration    when   developing    an accurate   drying
                                     availability of open-source code and libraries. Haghighat and Juanes [126] published   model.   During a
                                       convective   drying,  the turbulent   airflow
                                     PIML model developing steps through a special application programming interface air
                                                                                       inside  the dryer  creates  huge,  non-uniform     (API)
                                       distribution
                                     called  SciANN. around   productset
                                                         Nascimento      (Figure  3a).gave
                                                                           al. [127]   This anon-uniform
                                                                                               comprehensiveairflow  significantly changes
                                                                                                                  demonstration      of the im-
                                       the local heatof
                                     plementation      and massmodels
                                                         PIML     transfertocoefficients
                                                                             solve typicalof air across
                                                                                              PDEs.     the products.
                                                                                                      Moreover,         The
                                                                                                                   Bai et al.uneven   distri-
                                                                                                                              [128] published
                                       bution  of heat and  mass  transfer  coefficients significantly  alters the drying
                                     source code development steps for solid mechanics problems. Both of them used Python  kinetics, as well
                                       as the rate of drying. However, most existing theoretical drying models are developed
                                     and provided source code in the GitHub open-source community.
                                       without considering the airflow distribution and assuming constant characteristics for the
                                       convective air, considering a user-defined constant heat and mass transfer coefficient. This
                                       assumption may lead to inaccurate prediction of drying kinetics. The conjugation of air-
                                       flow distribution with the transport model is a challenging and complex task. An airflow
                                       model, for example, any computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model , can be integrated
                                       with the transport model in two different ways, and these can be referred to as the fully
                                       conjugate model and the semi-conjugate model. Integration of CFD directly with the heat
                                       and mass balance equations in the transport model is called the fully conjugate model and

[[PAGE 19]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                             18 of 27

                          6. Conjugation of Airflow in the Drying Model
                                The conjugation of airflow distribution across the dryer and around the products
                          needs to be taken into consideration when developing an accurate drying model. During
                          convective drying, the turbulent airflow inside the dryer creates huge, non-uniform air
                          distribution around products (Figure 3a). This non-uniform airflow significantly changes
                          the local heat and mass transfer coefficients of air across the products. The uneven dis-
                          tribution of heat and mass transfer coefficients significantly alters the drying kinetics, as
                          well as the rate of drying. However, most existing theoretical drying models are developed
                          without considering the airflow distribution and assuming constant characteristics for the
                          convective air, considering a user-defined constant heat and mass transfer coefficient. This
                          assumption may lead to inaccurate prediction of drying kinetics. The conjugation of airflow
                          distribution with the transport model is a challenging and complex task. An airflow model,
                          for example, any computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model, can be integrated with the
                          transport model in two different ways, and these can be referred to as the fully conjugate
                          model and the semi-conjugate model. Integration of CFD directly with the heat and mass
                          balance equations in the transport model is called the fully conjugate model and is the more
                          appropriate approach. Alternatively, the CFD model can be integrated with the transport
                          model through boundary conditions, and this model is referred to as a semi-conjugate
                          model [32]. To develop a conjugate drying model, extensive CFD analysis is required. In
                          this case, different turbulence models, such as the k-ω model, k-ε model, algebraic Y-plus
                          (SPF) model, L-VEL model, low-Reynolds-number k-ε mode (AKN), and SST model, can
                          be used to integrate CFD with the drying model. These models can be solved by using
                          Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equations [129].
                                Among these turbulence models, the k-ω model has been widely used due to its
                          simplicity and accurate prediction capability. Khan et al. [32] developed a semi-conjugate
                          model to predict the spatial distribution of airflow across the products during intermittent
                          microwave convective drying (IMCD). A k-ω turbulence model was integrated with the
                          drying model (simultaneous heat and mass transport) and volumetric heating (electromag-
                          netic) model, as shown in Figure 7. Well-known physics, including Fick’s second law of
                          mass transport, Fourier’s law of heat transfer, Lambert’s law for volumetric (microwave)
                          heating, and the Navier–Stokes equation for CFD analysis, was used to address the simul-
                          taneous heat, mass, and momentum transport process with volumetric heating. The model
                          was solved using COMSOL Multiphysics commercial software.
                                The authors found that spatial distribution of heat and mass transfer significantly affects
                          drying kinetics. They argued that a drying model that does not have CFD integrated may
                          overpredict drying kinetics [32]. A similar study was conducted by Defraeye et al. [130].
                          Although their model is able to predict convective heat and mass transfer phenomena, they
                          did not consider the original drying processes, such as the simultaneous heat and mass transfer
                          process. To address this gap, Defraeye and Radu [131] recently developed a CFD-integrated
                          convective drying model. They observed that complex airflow distribution significantly affects
                          drying kinetics. The aforementioned studies were conducted based on purely physics-based
                          modelling. PIML-based airflow modelling could be an exciting approach to predict airflow
                          distribution during drying. Although few attempts have been made to develop PIML-based
                          airflow modelling for other engineering applications [132,133], no PIML-based conjugated
                          model for drying applications is available in the literature. Therefore, future research is
                          recommended to address this research gap.

[[PAGE 20]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                                     19 of 27
       Energies 2022, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                         20 of 29

                                       Figure
                                    Figure    7. Schematic
                                           7. Schematic     diagramofof
                                                          diagram       differentphysics
                                                                      different           thatwas
                                                                                  physicsthat wasused
                                                                                                  usedto  develop aa CFD
                                                                                                                     CFD integrated
                                                                                                       todevelop         integrated 3D-
                                                                                                                                    3D-IMCD
                                       IMCD
                                    model     model [32].
                                           [32].

                                             The authors
                                    7. Challenges          found that
                                                      to Develop       spatial
                                                                    Drying     distribution of heat and mass transfer significantly
                                                                             Models
                                    7.1.affects dryingtokinetics.
                                         Challenges      CapturingThey argued
                                                                    Local Scalethat  a drying model that does not have CFD inte-
                                                                                Information
                                       grated may overpredict drying kinetics [32]. A similar study was conducted by Defraeye
                                       et As   mentioned
                                          al. [130]. Althoughearlier, dryingisis
                                                                their model           to predict multifaceted
                                                                                   a complex,
                                                                                able              convective heatproblem
                                                                                                                    and mass[44].   Thisphe-
                                                                                                                               transfer   complex
                                       nomena, they did not consider the original drying processes, such as the simultaneous of the
                                    drying   becomes     more  complicated     when    it is subjected  to  drying   food   materials.  One
                                              and mass transfer
                                       heatchallenges
                                    major                          process.aTo
                                                          to developing          address this gap,
                                                                              comprehensive            Defraeye
                                                                                                   drying   model andis Radu  [131] recently of the
                                                                                                                        the consideration
                                       developed
                                    multiscale       a CFD-integrated
                                                  features               convective
                                                             of the domain.     Fooddrying     model.
                                                                                        materials,      They observed
                                                                                                      particularly        that complex
                                                                                                                     plant-based    ones,air-
                                                                                                                                           contain
                                       flow distribution
                                    multiscale              significantly
                                                  heterogeneous            affects(Figure
                                                                    structures      drying 4).
                                                                                             kinetics. The aforementioned
                                                                                                Mathematically      addressing studies  were
                                                                                                                                  the multiphase
                                       conducted
                                    transport        based on on
                                                 phenomena          bothphysics-based
                                                                 purely    the micro- and   modelling.   PIML-based
                                                                                               macro scales    is one ofairflow   modelling tasks
                                                                                                                           the challenging
                                    forcould
                                        drying bemodelling.
                                                  an exciting approach    to predict
                                                                This is because    theairflow  distribution
                                                                                        transport   phenomenaduringand
                                                                                                                     drying.  Although few
                                                                                                                         the underlying    physics
                                    areattempts
                                        different have
                                                     on been         to develop
                                                              madescales.
                                                         different            ForPIML-based      airflow modelling
                                                                                   example, moisture        located for   other
                                                                                                                      in the    engineering(inside
                                                                                                                              microscale
                                    theapplications
                                        cell) migrates [132,133],
                                                          through    PIML-based
                                                                  no periodic        rupture, asmodel
                                                                               cellconjugated                 drying applications
                                                                                                         forcontinuous
                                                                                                    well as                         is avail-
                                                                                                                            diffusion  [23,58]. On
                                       able in the literature. Therefore, future research is recommended to address this research
                                    the other hand, the transport of free water from the macroscale domain is simply through
                                       gap.
                                    diffusion. These different moisture transport characteristics at various scales make the
                                    overall   problemtovery
                                       7. Challenges            complex;
                                                            Develop    Drying   Models mathematically addressing this problem is one
                                                                             therefore,
                                    of the biggest challenges in drying modelling. One of the major difficulties of multiscale
                                       7.1. Challenges to Capturing Local Scale Information
                                    modelling is capturing the microscale information and upscale to the macroscale. Different
                                             As mentioned earlier, drying is a complex, multifaceted problem [44]. This complex
                                    approaches, including homogenisation, Heterogeneous multiscale modelling (HMM) and
                                       drying becomes more complicated when it is subjected to drying food materials. One of
                                    equation-free     are very well-known approaches that have been widely used to upscale or
                                       the major challenges to developing a comprehensive drying model is the consideration of
                                    downscale     the local
                                       the multiscale        scaleof(microscale)
                                                         features                   information
                                                                      the domain. Food    materials,to particularly
                                                                                                       global scaleplant-based
                                                                                                                     (macroscale)     or con-
                                                                                                                                         vice versa
                                                                                                                                  ones,
                                        multiscale
                                    fortain  multiscalemodelling.     Homogenisation
                                                          heterogeneous                     can 4).
                                                                           structures (Figure    beMathematically     addressing the
                                                                                                     used only for upscaling            local scale
                                                                                                                                    the mul-
                                                     to the phenomena
                                       tiphase transport
                                    information              global scale;    both the micro-
                                                                           onhowever,                        scales isbe
                                                                                                and macrocannot
                                                                                          this approach                one  of the challeng-
                                                                                                                          utilised  to downscale
                                    theing  tasksscale
                                        global     for drying  modelling.
                                                        information,     for This is because
                                                                             instance,        the transport
                                                                                        macroscale            phenomena
                                                                                                        heat transfer       and
                                                                                                                       to the    the scale.
                                                                                                                                      under-In this
                                                                                                                               local
                                       lying
                                    case, HMM physics   are different
                                                    approach            on different
                                                                is the most           scales.
                                                                              effective       For example,
                                                                                         concurrent           moisture
                                                                                                        approach         located in the upscaling
                                                                                                                    for concurrently      mi-
                                    andcroscale  (inside the
                                         downscaling       thecell)
                                                               localmigrates   through
                                                                       scale and  globalperiodic  cell rupture, as
                                                                                           scale information        well as
                                                                                                                 during     continuous
                                                                                                                                     The dif-
                                                                                                                          drying.         details of
                                    thefusion            On the other
                                               [23,58].modelling
                                        multiscale                                 transport
                                                                        hand, thecan
                                                                     strategies       be foundof free  water
                                                                                                  in this    from the macroscale
                                                                                                           publication    [67].      domain
                                        is simply through diffusion. These different moisture transport characteristics at various
                                    7.2.scales make the
                                         Structural                  and very
                                                        overall problem
                                                    Heterogeneities           complex;
                                                                         Associated    therefore,Properties
                                                                                                  mathematically addressing this
                                                                                    Microscale
                                        problem is one of the biggest challenges in drying modelling. One of the major difficulties
                                         One of the main complexities of drying modelling, particularly food drying mod-
                                    elling, is associated with the heterogeneous microstructural elements of food materials. As
                                    mentioned earlier, plant-based food materials are multiscale in nature [134], and contain
                                    irregular cellular structures (Figure 4); different cells have their unique cellular properties,
                                    such as diffusivity, permeability, thermal conductivity, and specific heat capacity. These

[[PAGE 21]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                         20 of 27

                          diverse cellular properties govern the whole transport process from micro- to macroscale
                          and change with drying time. These cellular properties are extraordinarily important for
                          numerical modelling, particularly multiscale modelling, particularly, multiscale modelling,
                          designing the optimal dried food products, and optimising the quality attributes of the
                          products. For instance, micromechanical properties, such as elastic modulus, hardness, and
                          stiffness are the key measuring indexes of textural attributes of the dried products, which
                          are required for designing or creating new agri-based dried food products. Investigation of
                          the microscale properties of food materials during drying is extremely challenging, as the
                          structure of food material and the moisture content continuously change throughout the
                          drying processes. Moreover, the investigation of microscale properties requires extensive
                          sophisticated experimental investigations, which are time-consuming and expensive, and
                          facilities are mostly unavailable [135]. Although few microscale properties of fresh food
                          materials are available in the literature for pear [136,137], tomato [138–141], onion [142],
                          and apple [143,144], to the best of the author’s knowledge, no microscale properties of
                          food materials during drying exist in the literature. This creates a major obstacle to ad-
                          vancing the field by optimising drying processes and addressing the quality attributes
                          of the products address such research challenges, for the first time, Khan et al. [145] at-
                          tempted to investigate the micromechanical properties of food materials during drying
                          using the nanoindentation method. This study is a great new addition to the field to
                          provide fundamental information on micro-level properties during drying time. However,
                          performing the sophisticated experimental procedure on the microstructural elements such
                          as on the cell wall of F&V during drying is extraordinarily difficult [146]. This is because
                          the drying process continuously changes the shape and size of the wall. To overcome
                          these challenges of experimental study, a prediction-based modelling approach is required.
                          Recently, Khan et al. [146] developed a novel machine learning (ML)-based approach to
                          characterise and predict the micromechanical properties of F&V during drying using an
                          artificial neural network (ANN). The developed model was optimised using the genetic
                          algorithm (GA)-based optimisation tool and validated with the experimental data. They
                          found that the developed ML-based predictive model can accurately predict the microscale
                          properties of different F&V [146]. However, the inherent “black box” nature of ANN
                          challenges interpreting the actual decision-making process. Moreover, the prediction ability
                          of purely ML-based models is often physically inconsistent and has poor generalization
                          performance due to extrapolation or observational biases. To overcome these problems of
                          purely ML-based models, physics-based laws (numerical derivatives) of drying processes
                          can be integrated with ML-based algorithms. For example, Fick’s law of diffusion can be
                          integrated with ANN algorithms to solve diffusivity. To facilitate this fundamental need,
                          physics-informed machine learning (PIML) has emerged as a hybrid modelling paradigm
                          that has the potential to predict the microscale properties during drying.

                          7.3. Shrinkage of the Products during Drying
                                Shrinkage is an important phenomenon that happens during drying. During drying,
                          the viscoelastic matrix contracts due to the moisture loss from the different cellular com-
                          partments of the heterogeneous food materials. The contraction of the viscoelastic matrix
                          causes a large amount of deformation. The deformation of the products not only affects
                          their quality attributes but also the heat and mass transport processes. Therefore, account-
                          ing for deformation in drying modelling is crucial to accurately predict drying kinetics
                          and optimise the products’ quality. Most existing theoretical food-drying models have
                          been developed without considering global deformation (shrinkage) due to the extreme
                          complexities of mathematically formulating the actual shrinkage phenomena. The main
                          difficulty with developing a mechanistic model is the unavailability of the characteristic
                          data of food materials and their corresponding physics. For example, food materials,
                          particularly fruits and vegetables, are truly viscoelastic materials [147,148]. However, the
                          existing literature considered food materials to be elastic or hyperelastic materials; there-
                          fore, the neo-Hookean model (theory) was used to address shrinkage phenomena during

[[PAGE 22]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                          21 of 27

                          drying [15]. Although the model is able to predict the deformation of elastic materials at the
                          macroscale, a realistic understanding of deformation in food materials cannot be achieved.
                          The existing models were developed by considering the inappropriate assumption (food
                          materials are purely elastic material) mainly due to the inability of the theory to mathemat-
                          ically express the viscoelastic behaviour of food materials during drying. Moreover, the
                          existing deformation model was developed considering uniform deformation, whereas
                          food materials exhibit anisotropic deformation. To address the anisotropic deformations,
                          the structure–property relationship is required. The development of the structure–property
                          relationship is extremely difficult, as it requires real-time fundamental information, which
                          includes microstructural elements (cell sphericity, elongation equivalent diameter, and wall
                          thickness) and the micromechanical properties in line with the drying processes. Due to
                          these complexities, no structure–property relationship of food materials during drying is
                          available in the literature. Therefore, extensive further research is recommended towards
                          solving these major research challenges.

                          7.4. Modelling of Hybrid Drying
                               The development of theoretical (physics-based) models for describing the hybrid drying
                          method is also challenging. Hybrid drying methods are the combination of two or three
                          ordinary unique drying methods. For example, applying microwave energy intermittently
                          with vacuum drying is referred to as intermittent microwave vacuum drying (IMVD). Mathe-
                          matically describing and integrating all the processes in the same modelling framework is
                          a difficult and complex task. Due to this complexity, research in this area remains almost
                          grey, although very few theoretical models have already been developed for hybrid drying
                          modelling, such as those for IMCD [32,149]. To advance this field, rigorous work is still
                          required. As mentioned above, the development of purely theoretical models for hybrid
                          drying to address the fundamental drying mechanism is extremely complex, challenging, and
                          computationally expensive. This being the case, an advanced hybrid modelling framework
                          combining a data-driven model, such as ML modelling, with the physics-based model (PIML)
                          may be an exciting opportunity to mathematically address the fundamental transport process
                          and optimise the drying processe. However, extensive research is required to develop such a
                          complex PIML-based hybrid drying model for food drying.

                          7.5. PIML-Based Modelling Challenges
                               Even though PIML-based models can exclusively couple physics-based models with
                          observational data for enhanced predictions, PIML also has its downsides. First, when
                          emerging PIML for realistic applications, a massive computational cost is incurred when
                          compared to traditional approaches. Various techniques, such as domain decomposi-
                          tion [150,151] and parallel implementation of PIMLs [152], have been investigated to
                          reduce the training time with original feed-forward neural networks. In addition, hybrid
                          multi-GPU and CPU computing provide a promising level of effectiveness for computa-
                          tional efficiency. However, this approach needs more work to compete with traditional
                          computational approaches in terms of computational efficiency [106]. Second, the fully
                          connected feed-forward neural networks often fail to converge loss terms for meaningful or
                          correct solutions [153]. When more than one physics equation or condition is involved, loss
                          of balance cannot easily be achieved due to the mismatch between the observational data
                          and physics conditions. Even though self-adaptive hyperparameters for activation func-
                          tion [154] and loss weights [106,155] have shown better progress for PIML models, these
                          are case-sensitive. Recently, changing the neural network base model from a feed-forward
                          neural network to a graph neural network (GNN) has shown better capabilities for complex
                          systems with unstructured data; however, the approach requires more research [106].

                          8. Conclusions
                              Knowledge of the simultaneous heat, mass, and momentum transport phenomena
                          during drying is important to optimise the drying process and drying time and enhance

[[PAGE 23]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                         22 of 27

                                  energy efficiency. Enormous effort has been spent on understanding the actual drying
                                  process through experimental study and numerical modelling. As the experimental studies
                                  are product- and process-dependent and unable to provide the actual drying process, nu-
                                  merical modelling is the most effective tool to provide better insights into drying processes.
                                  Developing a purely physics-based model is very challenging and computationally inten-
                                  sive. PIML-based modelling has great potential to overcome the challenges of fundamental
                                  drying models. In this study, various aspects of drying processes, their working mecha-
                                  nisms, mathematical models of transport processes, and the potential of PIML have been
                                  broadly discussed. To develop a PIML-based property prediction model, the problem first
                                  needs to be defined by a neural network architecture. Then, it can be integrated with the
                                  relevant physics (PDE) of the problem through a combined loss function. Finally, numerical
                                  implementation needs to be performed for model training, testing, and validation. One of
                                  the major challenges of PIML modelling is to properly couple the multiphysics equations
                                  with a feed-forward neural network. If it is necessary to solve more than one physics equa-
                                  tion or condition, loss of balance cannot easily be achieved due to the mismatch between the
                                  observational data and physics conditions. Even though the self-adaptive hyperparameters
                                  for activation function and loss weights have shown better progress for PIML models, these
                                  are case-sensitive. This problem can be minimised by changing the neural network base
                                  model from a feed-forward neural network to a GNN, which has better capabilities for
                                  solving complex systems with unstructured data. Besides PIML, other challenges include
                                  the unavailability of microscale properties, which creates a major bottleneck to developing
                                  fine-scale (micro- or multiscale) modelling. To overcome these challenges, further research
                                  is recommended. Overall, it is expected that the potential information in this paper will be
                                  highly beneficial for future advancements in drying research.

                                  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.I.H.K.; methodology, M.I.H.K.; resources, M.A.K. and
                                  Y.G.; writing- review and editing, M.I.H.K., C.P.B.-G., M.A.K. and Y.G.; supervision, M.A.K. and Y.G.
                                  All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                  Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                  Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                  Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Air-Dried Food Market Size, Global Industry Report, 2020–2027. 2020. Report No: GVR-4-68038-513-7. Available online:
      https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/air-dried-food-market (accessed on 18 September 2022).
2.    Khan, M.I.H.; Joardder, M.U.H.; Kumar, C.; Karim, M.A. Multiphase porous media modelling: A novel approach to predicting
      food processing performance. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2018, 58, 528–546.
3.    Rzig, R.; Khedher, N.B.; Nasrallah, S.B. A 3-D numerical heat and mass transfer model for simulating the vibration effects on
      drying process. Heat Transf.—Asian Res. 2017, 46, 1204–1221. [CrossRef]
4.    Jomaa, W.; Puiggali, J.R. Drying of shrinking materials: Modellings with shrinkage velocity. Dry. Technol. 1991, 9, 1271–1293.
      [CrossRef]
5.    Kiranoudis, C.T.; Tsami, E.; Maroulis, Z.B.; Marinos-Kouris, D. Drying kinetics of some fruits. Dry. Technol. 1997, 15, 1399–1418.
6.    Putranto, A.; Chen, X.D.; Webley, P.A. Modeling of drying of food materials with thickness of several centimeters by the reaction
      engineering approach (REA). Dry. Technol. 2011, 29, 961–973.
7.    Ben Mabrouk, S.; Benali, E.; Oueslati, H. Experimental study and numerical modelling of drying characteristics of apple slices.
      Food Bioprod. Process. 2012, 90, 719–728. [CrossRef]
8.    Kaya, A.; Aydın, O.; Dincer, I. Experimental and numerical investigation of heat and mass transfer during drying of Hayward
      kiwi fruits (Actinidia Deliciosa Planch). J. Food Eng. 2008, 88, 323–330. [CrossRef]
9.    Khan, M.I.H.; Pham, D.N.; Karim, A. Theoretical and experimental investigation of temperature and moisture distributions and
      changes in nutritional quality during intermittent microwave convective drying. In Proceedings of the 21st International Drying
      Symposium, Editorial Universitat Politecnica de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 11–14 September 2018; 2018; pp. 553–560. [CrossRef]
10.   Golestani, R.; Raisi, A.; Aroujalian, A. Mathematical Modeling on Air Drying of Apples Considering Shrinkage and Variable
      Diffusion Coefficient. Dry. Technol. 2013, 31, 40–51. [CrossRef]

[[PAGE 24]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                           23 of 27

11.   Kumar, C.; Millar, G.J.; Karim, M.A. Effective Diffusivity and Evaporative Cooling in Convective Drying of Food Material. Dry.
      Technol. 2014, 33, 227–237. [CrossRef]
12.   Fowler, A.J.; Bejan, A. The effect of shrinkage on the cooking of meat. Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow 1991, 12, 375–383.
13.   Khan, M.; Kumar, C.; Joardder, M.U.H.; Karim, M.A. Determination of appropriate effective diffusivity for different food materials.
      Dry. Technol. 2017, 35, 335–346. [CrossRef]
14.   Datta, A.K. Porous media approaches to studying simultaneous heat and mass transfer in food processes. I: Problem formulations.
      J. Food Eng. 2007, 80, 80–95.
15.   Gulati, T.; Datta, A.K. Mechanistic understanding of case-hardening and texture development during drying of food materials.
      J. Food Eng. 2015, 166, 119–138. [CrossRef]
16.   Mercier, S.; Marcos, B.; Moresoli, C.; Mondor, M.; Villeneuve, S. Modeling of internal moisture transport during durum wheat
      pasta drying. J. Food Eng. 2014, 124, 19–27.
17.   Batuwatta-Gamage, C.P.; Rathnayaka, C.M.; Karunasena, H.C.P.; Wijerathne, W.D.C.C.; Jeong, H.; Welsh, Z.G.; Karim, M.A.; Gu,
      Y.T. A physics-informed neural network-based surrogate framework to predict moisture concentration and shrinkage of a plant
      cell during drying. J. Food Eng. 2022, 332, 111137. [CrossRef]
18.   Karniadakis, G.E.; Kevrekidis, I.G.; Lu, L.; Perdikaris, P.; Wang, S.; Yang, L. Physics-informed machine learning. Nat. Rev. Phys.
      2021, 3, 422–440. [CrossRef]
19.   Raissi, M.; Yazdani, A.; Karniadakis, G.E. Hidden fluid mechanics: Learning velocity and pressure fields from flow visualizations.
      Science 2020, 367, 1026–1030. [CrossRef]
20.   Raissi, M.; Perdikaris, P.; Karniadakis, G.E. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward
      and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. J. Comput. Phys. 2019, 378, 686–707. [CrossRef]
21.   Khan, M.I.H.; Karim, M. Cellular water distribution, transport, and its investigation methods for plant-based food material. Food
      Res. Int. 2017, 99, 1–14. [CrossRef]
22.   Khan, M.I.H.; Wellard, R.M.; Nagy, S.A.; Joardder, M.U.H.; Karim, M.A. Investigation of bound and free water in plant-based
      food material using NMR T2 relaxometry. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2016, 38, 252–261.
23.   Khan, M.I.H.; Farrell, T.; Nagy, S.A.; Karim, M.A. Fundamental Understanding of Cellular Water Transport Process in Bio-Food
      Material during Drying. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 15191. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.   Kumar, C.; Joardder, M.U.H.; Farrell, T.W.; Karim, M.A. Multiphase porous media model for intermittent microwave convective
      drying (IMCD) of food. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 2016, 104, 304–314. [CrossRef]
25.   Hamraoui, A.; Nylander, T. Analytical Approach for the Lucas–Washburn Equation. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2002, 250, 415–421.
26.   Aguilera, J.M.; Michel, M.; Mayor, G. Fat Migration in Chocolate: Diffusion or Capillary Flow in a Particulate Solid?—A
      Hypothesis Paper. J. Food Sci. 2004, 69, 167–174.
27.   Lucas, R. Ueber das Zeitgesetz des kapillaren Aufstiegs von Flüssigkeiten. Kolloid-Z. 1918, 23, 15–22. [CrossRef]
28.   Washburn, E.W. The Dynamics of Capillary Flow. Phys. Rev. 1921, 17, 273–283.
29.   Chemkhi, S.; Jomaa, W.; Zagrouba, F. Application of a Coupled Thermo-Hydro-Mechanical Model to Simulate the Drying of
      Nonsaturated Porous Media. Dry. Technol. 2009, 27, 842–850.
30.   Fuller, E.N.; Schettler, P.D.; Giddings, J.C. A new method for prediction of binary gas-phase diffusion coefficients. Ind. Eng. Res.
      1966, 58, 19–27.
31.   Bolz, R.; Tuve, G. Handbook of Tables for Applied Engineering Science, 2nd ed.; CRC Press: Cleveland, OH, USA, 1976.
32.   Khan, M.I.H.; Welsh, Z.; Gu, Y.; Karim, M.A.; Bhandari, B. Modelling of simultaneous heat and mass transfer considering the
      spatial distribution of air velocity during intermittent microwave convective drying. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2020, 153, 119668.
      [CrossRef]
33.   Bergman, T.L.; Bergman, T.L.; Incropera, F.P.; Dewitt, D.P.; Lavine, A.S. Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer; John Wiley & Sons:
      Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2016.
34.   Page, G.E. Factors Influencing the Maximum Rates of Air Drying Shelled Corn in Thin Layers; Purdue University: West Lafayette, IN,
      USA, 1949.
35.   Lewis, W.K. The rate of drying of solid materials. Ind. Eng. Chem. 1921, 13, 427–432. [CrossRef]
36.   Hendorson, S. Grain drying theory (I) temperature effect on drying coefficient. J. Agric. Eng. Res. 1961, 6, 169–174.
37.   Wang, C.; Singh, R. A Single Layer Drying Equation for Rough Rice; ASAE: St. Joseph, MI, USA, 1978; No. 78-3001.
38.   Chayjan, R.A.; Salari, K.; Shadidi, B. Modeling some drying characteristics of garlic sheets under semi fluidized and fluidized bed
      conditions. Res. Agric. Eng. 2012, 58, 73–82.
39.   Toğrul, İ.T.; Pehlivan, D. Modelling of drying kinetics of single apricot. J. Food Eng. 2003, 58, 23–32. [CrossRef]
40.   Queiroz, M.; Nebra, S. Theoretical and experimental analysis of the drying kinetics of bananas. J. Food Eng. 2001, 47, 127–132.
      [CrossRef]
41.   Akpinar, E.; Midilli, A.; Bicer, Y. Single layer drying behaviour of potato slices in a convective cyclone dryer and mathematical
      modeling. Energy Convers. Manag. 2003, 44, 1689–1705. [CrossRef]
42.   El-Sebaii, A.; El-Sebaii, A.A.; Aboul-Enein, S.; Ramadan, M.R.I.; El-Gohary, H.G. Empirical correlations for drying kinetics of
      some fruits and vegetables. Energy 2002, 27, 845–859.
43.   Midilli, A.; Kucuk, H. Mathematical modeling of thin layer drying of pistachio by using solar energy. Energy Convers. Manag.
      2003, 44, 1111–1122. [CrossRef]

[[PAGE 25]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                           24 of 27

44.   Khan, M.I.H.; Sablani, S.S.; Nayak, R.; Gu, Y. Machine learning-based modeling in food processing applications: State of the art.
      Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2022, 21, 1409–1438. [CrossRef]
45.   Batista, L.M.; da Rosa, C.A.; Pinto, L.A. Diffusive model with variable effective diffusivity considering shrinkage in thin layer
      drying of chitosan. J. Food Eng. 2007, 81, 127–132. [CrossRef]
46.   Pham, N.D.; Khan, M.; Karim, M. A mathematical model for predicting the transport process and quality changes during
      intermittent microwave convective drying. Food Chem. 2020, 325, 126932. [CrossRef]
47.   Da Silva, W.P.; da Silva, L.D.; Nascimento, P.L. Optimization and simulation of drying processes using diffusion models:
      Application to wood drying using forced air at low temperature. Wood Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 787–800. [CrossRef]
48.   Telljohann, U.; Junge, K.; Specht, E. Moisture Diffusion Coefficients for Modeling the First and Second Drying Sections of Green
      Bricks. Dry. Technol. 2008, 26, 855–863. [CrossRef]
49.   Lu, X.; Tsotsas, E.; Kharaghani, A. Drying of capillary porous media simulated by coupling of continuum-scale and micro-scale
      models. Int. J. Multiph. Flow 2021, 140, 103654. [CrossRef]
50.   Luikov, A.V. Systems of differential equations of heat and mass transfer in capillary-porous bodies. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 1975,
      18, 1–14. [CrossRef]
51.   Whitaker, S. Simultaneous Heat, Mass, and Momentum Transfer in Porous Media: A Theory of Drying. In Advances in Heat
      Transfer; James, P.H., Thomas, F.I., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1977; pp. 119–203.
52.   Curcio, S. A Multiphase Model to Analyze Transport Phenomena in Food Drying Processes. Dry. Technol. 2010, 28, 773–785.
      [CrossRef]
53.   Dhall, A.; Squier, G.; Geremew, M.; Wood, W.A.; George, J.; Datta, A.K. Modeling of Multiphase Transport during Drying of
      Honeycomb Ceramic Substrates. Dry. Technol. 2012, 30, 607–618. [CrossRef]
54.   Perré, P.; Turner, I.W. A 3-D version of TransPore: A comprehensive heat and mass transfer computational model for simulating
      the drying of porous media. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 1999, 42, 4501–4521. [CrossRef]
55.   Autengruber, M.; Lukacevic, M.; Füssl, J. Finite-element-based moisture transport model for wood including free water above the
      fiber saturation point. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2020, 161, 120228.
56.   Simo-Tagne, M.; Bennamoun, L.; Léonard, A.; Rogaume, Y. Modeling, numerical simulation and validation of a convective dryer
      in steady conditions: Case study of tropical woods. Int. J. Model. Simul. 2020, 40, 143–161. [CrossRef]
57.   Khan, M.I.H.; Nagy, S.A.; Karim, M. Transport of cellular water during drying: An understanding of cell rupturing mechanism in
      apple tissue. Food Res. Int. 2018, 105, 772–781.
58.   Khan, M.I.H.; Wellard, R.M.; Nagy, S.A.; Joardder, M.U.H.; Karim, M.A. Experimental investigation of bound and free water
      transport process during drying of hygroscopic food material. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 2017, 117, 266–273. [CrossRef]
59.   Welsh, Z.G.; Khan, M.I.H.; Karim, M.A. Multiscale modeling for food drying: A homogenized diffusion approach. J. Food Eng.
      2021, 292, 110252.
60.   Welsh, Z.G.; Simpson, M.J.; Khan, M.I.H.; Karim, A. A multiscale approach to estimate the cellular diffusivity during food drying.
      Biosyst. Eng. 2021, 212, 273–289. [CrossRef]
61.   Perré, P. Multiscale modeling of drying as a powerful extension of the macroscopic approach: Application to solid wood and
      biomass processing. Dry. Technol. 2010, 28, 944–959. [CrossRef]
62.   Zadin, V.; Kasemägi, H.; Valdna, V.; Vigonski, S.; Veske, M.; Aabloo, A. Application of multiphysics and multiscale simulations to
      optimize industrial wood drying kilns. Appl. Math. Comput. 2015, 267, 465–475. [CrossRef]
63.   Díaz, A.R.; Flores, E.I.S.; Yanez, S.J.; Vasco, D.A.; Pina, J.C.; Guzmán, C.F. Multiscale modeling of the thermal conductivity of
      wood and its application to cross-laminated timber. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 2019, 144, 79–92. [CrossRef]
64.   Liu, L.; Wang, X.; Chen, H.; Wan, C.; Zhang, M. Numerical modeling of drying shrinkage deformation of cement-based composites
      by coupling multiscale structure model with 3D lattice analyses. Comput. Struct. 2017, 178, 88–104. [CrossRef]
65.   Ho, Q.T.; Verboven, P.; Verlinden, B.E.; Herremans, E.; Wevers, M.; Carmeliet, J.; Nicolaï, B.M. A 3-D multiscale model for gas
      exchange in fruit. Plant Physiol. 2011, 155, 1158–1168.
66.   Aregawi, W.A.; Abera, M.K.; Fanta, S.W.; Verboven, P.; Nicolai, B. Prediction of water loss and viscoelastic deformation of apple
      tissue using a multiscale model. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2014, 26, 464111. [CrossRef]
67.   Welsh, Z.; Simpson, M.J.; Khan, M.I.H.; Karim, M.A. Multiscale Modeling for Food Drying: State of the Art. Compr. Rev. Food Sci.
      Food Saf. 2018, 17, 1293–1308. [CrossRef]
68.   Ritto, T.G.; Rochinha, F.A. Digital twin, physics-based model, and machine learning applied to damage detection in structures.
      Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2021, 155, 107614.
69.   Jordan, M.I.; Mitchell, T.M. Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects. Science 2015, 349, 255–260. [CrossRef]
70.   Kumar, P.; Sinha, K.; Nere, N.K.; Shin, Y.; Ho, R.; Mlinar, L.B.; Sheikh, A.Y. A machine learning framework for computationally
      expensive transient models. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 11492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71.   Liu, W.; Wang, Z.; Liu, X.; Zeng, N.; Liu, Y.; Alsaadi, F.E. A survey of deep neural network architectures and their applications.
      Neurocomputing 2017, 234, 11–26. [CrossRef]
72.   Chicco, D. Ten quick tips for machine learning in computational biology. BioData Min. 2017, 10, 35. [PubMed]
73.   Alzubaidi, L.; Zhang, J.; Humaidi, A.J.; Al-Dujaili, A.; Duan, Y.; Al-Shamma, O.; Santamaría, J.; Fadhel, M.A.; Al-Amidie, M.;
      Farhan, L. Review of deep learning: Concepts, CNN architectures, challenges, applications, future directions. J. Big Data 2021,
      8, 53. [CrossRef]

[[PAGE 26]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                              25 of 27

74.  Li, G.; Hari, S.K.S.; Sullivan, M.; Tsai, T.; Pattabiraman, K.; Emer, J.; Keckler, S.W. Understanding error propagation in deep learning
     neural network (DNN) accelerators and applications. In Proceedings of the International conference for High Performance
     Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, Denver, CO, USA, 12–17 November 2017; pp. 1–12.
75. Wu, H.; Lv, D.; Cui, T.; Hou, G.; Watanabe, M.; Kong, W. SDLV: Verification of Steering Angle Safety for Self-Driving Cars. Form.
     Asp. Comput. 2021, 33, 325–341. [CrossRef]
76. Cardoso, V.B.; Oliveira, A.S.; Forechi, A.; Azevedo, P.; Mutz, F.; Oliveira-Santos, T.; Badue, C.; De Souza, A.F. A Large-Scale
     Mapping Method Based on Deep Neural Networks Applied to Self-Driving Car Localization. In Proceedings of the 2020
     International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), Glasgow, UK, 19–24 July 2020; pp. 1–8.
77. Dahl, G.E.; Yu, D.; Deng, L.; Acero, A. Context-Dependent Pre-Trained Deep Neural Networks for Large-Vocabulary Speech
     Recognition. IEEE Trans. Audio Speech Lang. Process. 2012, 20, 30–42.
78. Tachbelie, M.Y.; Abulimiti, A.; Abate, S.T.; Schultz, T. DNN-Based Speech Recognition for Globalphone Languages. In Proceedings
     of the ICASSP 2020–2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Barcelona, Spain,
     4–8 May 2020; pp. 8269–8273.
79. Smit, P.; Virpioja, S.; Kurimo, M. Advances in subword-based HMM-DNN speech recognition across languages. Comput. Speech
     Lang. 2021, 66, 101158.
80. Wang, D.; Wang, X.; Lv, S. An overview of end-to-end automatic speech recognition. Symmetry 2019, 11, 1018.
81. Nagrath, P.; Jain, R.; Madan, A.; Arora, R.; Kataria, P.; Hemanth, J. SSDMNV2: A real time DNN-based face mask detection
     system using single shot multibox detector and MobileNetV2. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021, 66, 102692. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Cao, N.; Chatterjee, B.; Gong, M.; Chang, M.; Sen, S.; Raychowdhury, A. A 65 nm Image Processing SoC Supporting Multiple
     DNN Models and Real-Time Computation-Communication Trade-Off Via Actor-Critical Neuro-Controller. In Proceedings of the
     2020 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Circuits, Honolulu, HI, USA, 16–19 June 2020; pp. 1–2.
83. Yang, X.; Li, F.; Liu, H. A Survey of DNN Methods for Blind Image Quality Assessment. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 123788–123806.
84. Mallikarjuna, B.; Shrivastava, G.; Sharma, M. Blockchain technology: A DNN token-based approach in healthcare and COVID-19
     to generate extracted data. Expert Syst. 2021, 39, e12778. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Shi, J.; Fan, X.; Wu, J.; Chen, J.; Chen, W. DeepDiagnosis: DNN-Based Diagnosis Prediction from Pediatric Big Healthcare Data. In
     Proceedings of the 2018 Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cloud and Big Data (CBD), Lanzhou, China, 12–15 August 2018.
86. Shamshirband, S.; Fathi, M.; Dehzangi, A.; Chronopoulos, A.T.; Alinejad-Rokny, H. A review on deep learning approaches in
     healthcare systems: Taxonomies, challenges, and open issues. J. Biomed. Inform. 2021, 113, 103627. [CrossRef]
87. Jain, S.; Chauhan, R. Recognition of Handwritten Digits Using DNN, CNN, and RNN. In Advances in Computing and Data Sciences;
     Springer: Singapore, 2018.
88. Rismiyati; Khadijah; Nurhadiyatna, A. Deep learning for handwritten Javanese character recognition. In Proceedings of the 2017
     1st International Conference on Informatics and Computational Sciences (ICICoS), Semarang, Indonesia, 15–16 November 2017.
89. Koyuncu, B.; Koyuncu, H. Handwritten Character Recognition by using Convolutional Deep Neural Network; Review. Int. J.
     Eng. Technol. IJET 2019, 5, 1–5.
90. Felix, A.Y.; Jesudoss, A.; Mayan, J.A. Entry and exit monitoring using license plate recognition. In Proceedings of the 2017
     IEEE International Conference on Smart Technologies and Management for Computing, Communi-cation, Controls, Energy and
     Materials (ICSTM), Chennai, India, 2–4 August 2017.
91. Rackauckas, C.; Ma, Y.; Martensen, J.; Warner, C.; Zubov, K.; Supekar, R.; Skinner, D.; Ramadhan, A.; Edelman, A. Universal
     differential equations for scientific machine learning. arXiv 2020, arXiv:2001.04385.
92. Sun, Q.; Zhang, M.; Mujumdar, A.S. Recent developments of artificial intelligence in drying of fresh food: A review. Crit. Rev.
     Food Sci. Nutr. 2019, 59, 2258–2275.
93. Khan, M.I.H.; Sablani, S.S.; Joardder, M.U.H.; Karim, M.A. Application of machine learning-based approach in food drying:
     Opportunities and challenges. Dry. Technol. 2022, 40, 1051–1067. [CrossRef]
94. Martynenko, A.; Misra, N.N. Machine learning in drying. Dry. Technol. 2019, 38, 596–609. [CrossRef]
95. Fabani, M.P.; Capossio, J.P.; Román, M.C.; Zhu, W.; Rodriguez, R.; Mazza, G. Producing non-traditional flour from watermelon
     rind pomace: Artificial neural network (ANN) modeling of the drying process. J. Environ. Manag. 2021, 281, 111915. [CrossRef]
     [PubMed]
96. Demirpolat, A.B. Investigation of Mass Transfer with Different Models in a Solar Energy Food-Drying System. Energies 2019,
     12, 3447.
97. Kırbaş, İ.; Tuncer, A.D.; Şirin, C.; Usta, H. Modeling and developing a smart interface for various drying methods of pomelo fruit
     (Citrus maxima) peel using machine learning approaches. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2019, 165, 104928. [CrossRef]
98. Islam, M.R.; Sablani, S.S.; Mujumdar, A.S. An Artificial Neural Network Model for Prediction of Drying Rates. Dry. Technol. 2003,
     21, 1867–1884.
99. Qadri, O.S.; Osama, K.; Srivastava, A.K. Foam mat drying of papaya using microwaves: Machine learning modeling. J. Food
     Process Eng. 2020, 43, e13394. [CrossRef]
100. Ochoa-Martínez, C.I.; Ayala-Aponte, A.A. Prediction of mass transfer kinetics during osmotic dehydration of apples using neural
     networks. LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 2007, 40, 638–645. [CrossRef]
101. Chen, Y.; Martynenko, A. Computer vision for real-time measurements of shrinkage and color changes in blueberry convective
     drying. Dry. Technol. 2013, 31, 1114–1123.

[[PAGE 27]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                          26 of 27

102. Udomkun, P.; Nagle, M.; Argyropoulos, D.; Mahayothee, B.; Müller, J. Multi-sensor approach to improve optical monitoring of
     papaya shrinkage during drying. J. Food Eng. 2016, 189, 82–89. [CrossRef]
103. Iheonye, A.; Gariepy, Y.; Raghavan, V. Computer vision for real-time monitoring of shrinkage for peas dried in a fluidized bed
     dryer. Dry. Technol. 2019, 38, 130–146. [CrossRef]
104. Das, M.; Alic, E.; Akpinar, E.K. Detailed analysis of mass transfer in solar food dryer with different methods. Int. Commun. Heat
     Mass Transf. 2021, 128, 105600. [CrossRef]
105. Hernandez-Perez, J.A.; Garcıa-Alvarado, M.A.; Trystram, G.; Heyd, B. Neural networks for the heat and mass transfer prediction
     during drying of cassava and mango. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2004, 5, 57–64. [CrossRef]
106. Shukla, K.; Xu, M.; Trask, N.; Karniadakis, G.E. Scalable algorithms for physics-informed neural and graph networks. Data-Cent.
     Eng. 2022, 3, e24.
107. Cai, S.; Wang, Z.; Wang, S.; Perdikaris, P.; Karniadakis, G.E. Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Heat Transfer Problems.
     J. Heat Transf. 2021, 143, 060801.
108. Blechschmidt, J.; Ernst, O.G. Three ways to solve partial differential equations with neural networks—A review. GAMM-Mitt.
     2021, 44, e202100006.
109. Almajid, M.M.; Abu-Al-Saud, M.O. Prediction of porous media fluid flow using physics informed neural networks. J. Pet. Sci.
     Eng. 2022, 208, 109205. [CrossRef]
110. Weng, Y.; Zhou, D. Multiscale Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Stiff Chemical Kinetics. J. Phys. Chem. A 2022, 126,
     8534–8543. [CrossRef]
111. Willard, J.; Jia, X.; Xu, S.; Steinbach, M.; Kumar, V. Integrating physics-based modeling with machine learning: A survey. arXiv
     2020, arXiv:2003.04919.
112. Cai, S.; Mao, Z.; Wang, Z.; Yin, M.; Karniadakis, G.E. Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) for fluid mechanics: A review.
     Acta Mech. Sin. 2022, 37, 1727–1738. [CrossRef]
113. Jagtap, A.D.; Mao, Z.; Adams, N.; Karniadakis, G.E. Physics-informed neural networks for inverse problems in supersonic flows.
     J. Comput. Phys. 2022, 466, 111402. [CrossRef]
114. Bai, Y.; Chen, W.; Chen, J.; Guo, W. Deep learning methods for solving linear inverse problems: Research directions and paradigms.
     Signal Process. 2020, 177, 107729. [CrossRef]
115. Lin, T.; Wang, Z.; Wang, W.; Sui, Y. A neural network-based algorithm for high-throughput characterisation of viscoelastic
     properties of flowing microcapsules. Soft Matter 2021, 17, 4027–4039.
116. Ongie, G.; Jalal, A.; Metzler, C.A.; Baraniuk, R.G.; Dimakis, A.G.; Willett, R. Deep learning techniques for inverse problems in
     imaging. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory 2020, 1, 39–56. [CrossRef]
117. He, Z.; Ni, F.; Wang, W.; Zhang, J.A. physics-informed deep learning method for solving direct and inverse heat conduction
     problems of materials. Mater. Today Commun. 2021, 28, 102719. [CrossRef]
118. Laubscher, R. Simulation of multi-species flow and heat transfer using physics-informed neural networks. Phys. Fluids 2021,
     33, 087101. [CrossRef]
119. Niaki, S.A.; Haghighat, E.; Campbell, T.; Poursartip, A.; Vaziri, R. Physics-informed neural network for modelling the thermo-
     chemical curing process of composite-tool systems during manufacture. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 2021, 384, 113959.
120. Laubscher, R.; Rousseau, P. Application of a mixed variable physics-informed neural network to solve the incompressible
     steady-state and transient mass, momentum, and energy conservation equations for flow over in-line heated tubes. Appl. Soft
     Comput. 2022, 114, 108050. [CrossRef]
121. Zhang, W.; al Kobaisi, M. On the Monotonicity and Positivity of Physics-Informed Neural Networks for Highly Anisotropic
     Diffusion Equations. Energies 2022, 15, 6823. [CrossRef]
122. Liu, M.; Liang, L.; Sun, W. A generic physics-informed neural network-based constitutive model for soft biological tissues.
     Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 2020, 372, 113402.
123. Taghizadeh, E.; Byrne, H.M.; Wood, B.D. Explicit physics-informed neural networks for nonlinear closure: The case of transport
     in tissues. J. Comput. Phys. 2022, 449, 110781. [CrossRef]
124. Arzani, A.; Wang, J.-X.; D’Souza, R.M. Uncovering near-wall blood flow from sparse data with physics-informed neural networks.
     Phys. Fluids 2021, 33, 071905. [CrossRef]
125. Kowalczyk, D.; Baraniak, B. Effect of candelilla wax on functional properties of biopolymer emulsion films—A comparative
     study. Food Hydrocoll. 2014, 41, 195–209. [CrossRef]
126. Haghighat, E.; Juanes, R. SciANN: A Keras/TensorFlow wrapper for scientific computations and physics-informed deep learning
     using artificial neural networks. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 2021, 373, 113552. [CrossRef]
127. Nascimento, R.G.; Fricke, K.; Viana, F.A.C. A tutorial on solving ordinary differential equations using Python and hybrid
     physics-informed neural network. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2020, 96, 103996.
128. Bai, J.; Jeong, H.; Batuwatta-Gamage, C.P.; Xiao, S.; Wang, Q.; Rathnayaka, C.M.; Alzubaidi, L.; Liu, G.R.; Gu, Y. An introduction
     to programming Physics-Informed Neural Network-based computational solid mechanics. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2210.09060.
129. Defraeye, T.; Verboven, P.; Nicolai, B. CFD modelling of flow and scalar exchange of spherical food products: Turbulence and
     boundary-layer modelling. J. Food Eng. 2013, 114, 495–504. [CrossRef]
130. Defraeye, T.; Herremans, E.; Verboven, P.; Carmeliet, J.; Nicolai, B. Convective heat and mass exchange at surfaces of horticultural
     products: A microscale CFD modelling approach. Agric. For. Meteorol. 2012, 162, 71–84. [CrossRef]

[[PAGE 28]]
Energies 2022, 15, 9347                                                                                                           27 of 27

131. Defraeye, T.; Radu, A. Insights in convective drying of fruit by coupled modeling of fruit drying, deformation, quality evolution
     and convective exchange with the airflow. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2018, 129, 1026–1038. [CrossRef]
132. Wu, J.-L.; Xiao, H.; Paterson, E. Physics-informed machine learning approach for augmenting turbulence models: A comprehen-
     sive framework. Phys. Rev. Fluids 2018, 3, 074602. [CrossRef]
133. Wang, J.-X.; Wu, J.-L.; Xiao, H. Physics-informed machine learning approach for reconstructing Reynolds stress modeling
     discrepancies based on DNS data. Phys. Rev. Fluids 2017, 2, 034603. [CrossRef]
134. Rahman, M.M.; Joardder, M.U.; Khan, M.I.H.; Pham, N.D.; Karim, M.A. Multi-scale model of food drying: Current status and
     challenges. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2018, 58, 858–876. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
135. Khan, M.I.H.; Rahman, M.M.; Karim, M.A. Recent advances in micro-level experimental investigation in food drying technology.
     Dry. Technol. 2020, 38, 557–576. [CrossRef]
136. Kozioł, A.; Cybulska, J.; Pieczywek, P.M.; Zdunek, A. Changes of pectin nanostructure and cell wall stiffness induced in vitro by
     pectinase. Carbohydr. Polym. 2017, 161, 197–207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Zdunek, A.; Kozioł, A.; Cybulska, J.; Lekka, M.; Pieczywek, P.M. The stiffening of the cell walls observed during physiological
     softening of pears. Planta 2016, 243, 519–529.
138. Zdunek, A.; Kurenda, A. Determination of the elastic properties of tomato fruit cells with an atomic force microscope. Sensors
     2013, 13, 12175–12191. [PubMed]
139. Wang, C.; Pritchard, J.; Thomas, C. Investigation of the mechanics of single tomato fruit cells. J. Texture Stud. 2006, 37, 597–606.
     [CrossRef]
140. Wang, C.; Wang, L.; Thomas, C. Modelling the mechanical properties of single suspension-cultured tomato cells. Ann. Bot. 2004,
     93, 443–453. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
141. Dintwa, E.; Jancsók, P.; Mebatsion, H.K.; Verlinden, B.; Verboven, P.; Wang, C.X.; Thomas, C.R.; Tijskens, E.; Ramon, H.; Nicolaï, B.
     A finite element model for mechanical deformation of single tomato suspension cells. J. Food Eng. 2011, 103, 265–272. [CrossRef]
142. Xi, X.; Kim, S.H.; Tittmann, B. Atomic force microscopy based nanoindentation study of onion abaxial epidermis walls in aqueous
     environment. J. Appl. Phys. 2015, 117, 024703. [CrossRef]
143. Cárdenas-Pérez, S.; Chanona-Pérez, J.J.; Méndez-Méndez, J.V.; Calderón-Domínguez, G.; López-Santiago, R.; Arzate-Vázquez, I.
     Nanoindentation study on apple tissue and isolated cells by atomic force microscopy, image and fractal analysis. Innov. Food Sci.
     Emerg. Technol. 2016, 34, 234–242. [CrossRef]
144. Cárdenas-Pérez, S.; Méndez-Méndez, J.V.; Chanona-Pérez, J.J.; Zdunek, A.; Güemes-Vera, N.; Calderón-Domínguez, G.;
     Rodríguez-González, F. Prediction of the nanomechanical properties of apple tissue during its ripening process from its firmness,
     color and microstructural parameters. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2017, 39, 79–87. [CrossRef]
145. Khan, M.I.H.; Patel, N.; Mahiuddin, M.; Karim, M.A. Characterisation of mechanical properties of food materials during drying
     using nanoindentation. J. Food Eng. 2021, 291, 110306.
146. Khan, M.I.H.; Longa, D.; Sablani, S.S.; Gu, Y. A Novel Machine Learning–Based Approach for Characterising the Micromechanical
     Properties of Food Material During Drying. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2022. [CrossRef]
147. Mahiuddin, M.; Khan, M.I.H.; Kumar, C.; Rahman, M.M.; Karim, M.A. Shrinkage of food materials during drying: Current status
     and challenges. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2018, 17, 1113–1126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Mahiuddin, M.; Khan, M.I.H.; Pham, N.D.; Karim, M.A. Development of fractional viscoelastic model for characterizing
     viscoelastic properties of food material during drying. Food Biosci. 2018, 23, 45–53. [CrossRef]
149. Kumar, C.; Joardder, M.U.H.; Farrell, T.W.; Karim, M.A. Investigation of intermittent microwave convective drying (IMCD) of
     food materials by a coupled 3D electromagnetics and multiphase model. Dry. Technol. 2018, 36, 736–750. [CrossRef]
150. Jagtap, A.D.; Karniadakis, G.E. Extended Physics-informed Neural Networks (XPINNs): A Generalized Space-Time Domain
     Decomposition based Deep Learning Framework for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring
     Symposium: MLPS, Stanford, CA, USA, 22–24 March 2021.
151. Kharazmi, E.; Zhang, Z.; Karniadakis, G.E.M. hp-VPINNs: Variational physics-informed neural networks with domain decompo-
     sition. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 2021, 374, 113547. [CrossRef]
152. Shukla, K.; Jagtap, A.D.; Karniadakis, G.E. Parallel physics-informed neural networks via domain decomposition. J. Comput.
     Phys. 2021, 447, 110683. [CrossRef]
153. Wang, S.; Yu, X.; Perdikaris, P. When and why PINNs fail to train: A neural tangent kernel perspective. J. Comput. Phys. 2022,
     449, 110768. [CrossRef]
154. Jagtap, A.D.; Kawaguchi, K.; Karniadakis, G.E. Adaptive activation functions accelerate convergence in deep and physics-
     informed neural networks. J. Comput. Phys. 2020, 404, 109136.
155. Hu, H.; Dey, D.; Hebert, M.; Bagnell, J.A. Learning anytime predictions in neural networks via adaptive loss balancing. In
     Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Atlanta, GA, USA, 8–12 October 2019.
